[Amit Varma]: What is common to all human beings? Here's one answer. We are all mathematical modellers.
[Amit Varma]: Think about it. Whenever you do something, you have a sense of how it will turn out.
[Amit Varma]: And this is based on past experience and knowledge and so on. Like when you cross the road, you
[Amit Varma]: know that there's a tiny chance that you will be run over. But there is a model in your
[Amit Varma]: head that tells you that there's a high probability of getting to the other side. So off you go
[Amit Varma]: crossing the road along with the proverbial chicken. Now, while you're modelling the future,
[Amit Varma]: you're not explicitly modelling the future. You're not laying down all your assumptions,
[Amit Varma]: putting numbers to them, assigning probabilities, doing Bayesian thinking, none of that. But
[Amit Varma]: implicitly, you're doing a crude version of modelling. And it has always been my contention
[Amit Varma]: that refining this crude process in our heads can help us think clearly about the world.
[Amit Varma]: It can make us more mindful about what we do and why. It can give us insight into ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: What are our priorities? What are our biases? What are we in denial about? That is why for
[Amit Varma]: personal growth, if nothing else, we should think more about the modelling processes that
[Amit Varma]: we adopt. If we are not clear about why we are doing what we are doing, then isn't it
[Unknown]: much more likely that we'll make mistakes?
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Gautam Menon, a professor of physics
[Amit Varma]: and biology at Ashoka University, and a pioneer in the relatively new field of biophysics.
[Amit Varma]: Gautam is also a pioneer in the mathematical modelling of infectious diseases, and was
[Amit Varma]: one of the first specialists to take COVID-19 seriously before the pandemic hit last year.
[Amit Varma]: I have gotten tremendous insights from his scholarship and his public work over the last
[Amit Varma]: few months, and I was delighted to have him as a guest on the show. As I expected, I got
[Amit Varma]: many, many insights on COVID-19, the modelling of infectious diseases, and the second wave.
[Amit Varma]: Gautam is soft spoken, nuanced and lucid, the ideal professor I feel so jealous of his
[Amit Varma]: students at Ashoka. He is also deeply passionate about his work. The first half of our conversation
[Amit Varma]: was about his personal journey. And one of the things I loved about it was how he expressed
[Amit Varma]: his love of science, the joy that he gets out of it. I found it well, infectious. Before
[Amit Varma]: we get to the conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: I often think about how little I know about the world that I live in. This is not something
[Amit Varma]: to lament, but something that should excite all of us. There is so much to discover. And
[Amit Varma]: I don't just mean this about the larger than life phenomena around us, the geopolitics
[Amit Varma]: and the economics and our planetary system and so on. I mean this also about the microscopic
[Amit Varma]: world, the world of viruses and bacteria and fungi and so on, that we are basically slave
[Amit Varma]: to. To understand more about this fascinating world, I'd like to recommend a course for
[Amit Varma]: you. Head on over to the sponsors of this episode, The Great Courses Plus at The Great
[Amit Varma]: Courses Plus dot com and check out a course called Mysteries of the Microscopic World
[Amit Varma]: taught by award winning Professor Bruce E. Fleury. It consists of 24 encrossing online
[Amit Varma]: lectures and you might find yourself binge watching once you start. This is just one
[Amit Varma]: of the many great courses on this aptly named site. The Great Courses Plus has a fantastic
[Amit Varma]: library of online courses from subjects ranging from music, math, cooking, history, political
[Amit Varma]: theory and much else. They also have an app where you can listen to the audio of these
[Amit Varma]: courses the same way you listen to podcasts and it will cost you nothing. You get one
[Amit Varma]: month of unlimited free access if you use the following URL, The Great Courses Plus
[Amit Varma]: dot com slash unseen. That's right, unseen. The Great Courses Plus dot com slash unseen
[Amit Varma]: for one month of unlimited free access. Sign up now. Understand the world better.
[Amit Varma]: Gautam, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. I'm very happy to be here, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Gautam, I always start my conversations by asking people more about their background
[Amit Varma]: and where they came from and all of that. But before we go into the distant past, which
[Amit Varma]: I like to do, I also want to kind of talk about the present. How have the last few months
[Amit Varma]: been for you and how have the last couple of weeks been for you? Because these are very
[Amit Varma]: torrid times for all of us. How have you been keeping up?
[Guest]: I think they've been difficult for pretty much everybody. I'm lucky in that I know relatively
[Guest]: few people in my immediate circle of family and friends who've been sort of seriously
[Guest]: ill with COVID. I know many people who've got COVID-19. But when I hear the stories
[Guest]: that my friends tell me of their own relatives or people close to them who've been very seriously
[Guest]: ill, had trouble locating oxygen, trouble locating ICU, some of them have passed away.
[Guest]: It's heart wrenching in a very difficult time. So at least I'm glad that so far this hasn't
[Guest]: happened to me, but my heart goes out to everyone who has lost people close to them during this
[Amit Varma]: time. Let's now go back to your childhood and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, because I'm kind of very interested in what shapes people, what molds them, where
[Amit Varma]: do they come from? So tell me a bit about your childhood. Where were you born? Where
[Amit Varma]: did you grow up? What was your childhood like? What did you do as a kid?
[Guest]: I was born in one of the most beautiful cities in the world, I think. This is a city called
[Guest]: Kochi. It's known, I mean, it's old name and when I used to be there was Cochin. It's on
[Guest]: the Arabian Sea. It has an old part to it, which is really where I grew up. It's called
[Guest]: Fort Cochin, which has a history of, you know, both the Dutch and then the British later.
[Guest]: So the buildings are old. There is an old, one of the oldest churches in India is over
[Guest]: there. That's where Vasco de Gama came and was buried initially. It was a lovely time.
[Guest]: I mean, I grew up in the late 60s, early 70s, and I spent the first 16 years, roughly speaking,
[Guest]: of my childhood over there. You know, extremely beautiful. I lived there about 10 meters away
[Guest]: from the sea for pretty much, I don't know, half my life over that period or more probably.
[Guest]: And I can't think of a more beautiful place to grow up. It was a quieter, milder time.
[Guest]: My parents were roughly middle class, maybe a little upper middle class, very aware of
[Guest]: the importance of education, reading and learning of all sorts and all varieties. My father
[Guest]: himself taught both econometrics and English literature in university before he decided
[Guest]: that he had to look after his own parents and moved to a more commercial career. But
[Guest]: he still had that amazing connect with learning in a sense. So he had a wonderful library.
[Guest]: We had about 5,000 books at home that he had collected, his own collection. And I grew
[Guest]: up surrounded by books. I grew up surrounded by people who read books, who discuss them,
[Guest]: a whole bunch of friends. And his interests were not just apart from being literature,
[Guest]: philosophy, it was also art, music. So I grew up surrounded by all of this. My mother initially
[Guest]: had learned Carnatic music and so was a singer, although she never really used that. Grew
[Guest]: up in really a loving household. There's no other way to put it, which was very supportive
[Guest]: of anything that I might have wanted to do. I went to school very close to where I stayed
[Guest]: for much of my, apart from brief period in boarding school. And I think I had good teachers
[Guest]: overall, particularly a very good chemistry teacher. And that was probably what stimulated
[Guest]: my interest in science. Of course, at the point in which I sort of left Cochin, I was
[Guest]: interested in many things. I could have been a writer. In fact, if I think if I was to
[Guest]: pursue an alternative career, it would be as a writer, because I really enjoy writing,
[Guest]: enjoy communication. And so I do a lot more of that now in terms of communicating science
[Guest]: and the intricacies of what's happening now with the current COVID situation. I realise
[Guest]: that that plays into a part of me that goes back a long way.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of things strike me about what you just said. And also commonalities because
[Amit Varma]: my father also had thousands of books at home and he was a civil servant. He was an IAS
[Amit Varma]: officer and I was fortunate to pick up early habits of reading. And my mother was also
[Amit Varma]: a musician. But what I'm struck by, by what you said about your father is that he taught
[Amit Varma]: econometrics and literature, which is a sort of a very unusual combination in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that people who teach literature are not people you typically think of as, you know, numbers
[Amit Varma]: people necessarily and all of that. So it's a very unusual combination. And then you said
[Amit Varma]: you wanted to be a writer, tell me a little bit about the kind of books you read as a
[Amit Varma]: kid, what are the kind of books that shaped you? I'm also struck by how you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that perhaps your love for the sciences could have been influenced by your chemistry teacher
[Amit Varma]: being as good as he was, which is wonderful to hear, because, you know, it's a treasure
[Amit Varma]: when you come across a good teacher in your childhood. So were there any magical moments
[Amit Varma]: which kind of sparked your love for the sciences or chemistry or, you know, all of that? I
[Guest]: mean, I know I've asked you two separate questions. So to go to the first point, I mean, I think
[Guest]: the books in our house were in quotes adult books. There were very few that were really
[Guest]: intended for children. So already I was sort of used to reading books that were noticeably
[Guest]: more advanced. My father had a love for biography. So we had a whole range of biographies at
[Guest]: home. So reading about people who were famous in both the Western and the Indian canon,
[Guest]: I grew up with that and sort of tried to think about people in that way. And it never struck
[Guest]: me that this was unusual, that I was actually reading far beyond my age, because that was
[Guest]: all I had to read. It was only sort of going out and finding out what other people read
[Guest]: that it struck me that this was in any way different from the experience that other people
[Guest]: might normally have had. My teachers were important, certainly, but I think it was also
[Guest]: the fact that my parents supported whatever that I did. I mean, I was, for example, I
[Guest]: was interested in chemistry. So they got me a chemistry set and I would do small little
[Guest]: chemistry experiments. And I think there's nothing like chemistry to quite fire a young
[Guest]: person's imagination. It's just, you know, you can see it's a very tactile feeling. You
[Guest]: can see colours change, you can see crystals form. So that's a good way of getting people
[Guest]: into the sciences. But of course, there were also books. And I remember one book that struck
[Guest]: me particularly is this book called My Family and Other Animals, which you may have read
[Guest]: and loved yourselves as a child. And that, you know, sort of the introduction to the
[Guest]: natural world and how to think about the natural world to see what's happening from the point
[Guest]: of view of a child. And you can see Darrell's amazing writing. He's writing it as an adult,
[Guest]: but you can see it through the eyes of a child. And, you know, it's really a work of literature.
[Guest]: And you know, you can sort of imagine from its popularity and from the fact that both
[Guest]: of us have read it, that it's, it combined both what I thought was, you know, beautiful
[Guest]: writing as well as a real sharp eye for what a child sees in the world around them. And
[Guest]: I think that was also very pivotal in ways that I didn't quite realise until I grew older.
[Guest]: And so it was these things that I grew up with, books about adventure, of course, every
[Guest]: child would want to read about that. Cricket, which I played a lot and also books about
[Guest]: cricket, which were the rage at that time for some strange reason among my friends.
[Guest]: And it was these things that surrounded me when I grew up as a child.
[Amit Varma]: Suppose your education, like at this point, you know, when you're growing up, when does
[Amit Varma]: your conception of yourself as someone who's going to go into the sciences and immerse
[Amit Varma]: himself in that world, when does that begin to form and take shape? Because I imagine
[Amit Varma]: like when we are young, it's very nebulous and then gradually things begin to form and
[Amit Varma]: take shape. And then there is a road taken and the road not taken. And you've already
[Amit Varma]: almost wistfully spoken about the writing road as perhaps a road not taken. When was
[Amit Varma]: the road taken, taken as it were?
[Guest]: So I think around my 11th standard or 12th standard, I was beginning to think about what
[Guest]: it is that I wanted to do. And somehow that's the point where I moved away from chemistry
[Guest]: into thinking about physics. And I think I can sort of describe why that happened. It
[Guest]: seemed to me that physics had a simplicity that the other sciences didn't have. I mean,
[Guest]: you could write down equations that described everything around you on essentially a few
[Guest]: sheets of paper, whereas with biology is full of exceptions to any general rule. There are
[Guest]: outstanding and remarkable principles, those of evolution, theory of evolution, for example.
[Guest]: But overall, every biological system is unique in its own very special way. And with chemistry,
[Guest]: of course, there was this limitation. There's a certain number of elements that you have
[Guest]: to play around with, an amazing combination that you can make out of these. I think what
[Guest]: I've been looking for is always simplicity. That's something that I found in physics,
[Guest]: the fact that there was so much that you could understand just from the application of a
[Guest]: very, very small number of physical laws. And I think that was important, which is why
[Guest]: I decided to do physics as an undergrad. But even then, I could have, it was sort of physics
[Guest]: plus writing, physics plus music, physics plus lots of things. And I was still somewhat
[Guest]: uncertain at that point. In principle, I could still have made a change after that. I was
[Guest]: perfectly willing to do so. But it's just that physics seduced me further and further
[Guest]: as I went. And finally, I decided that that's what I really wanted to do. And I loved it
[Amit Varma]: enough to want to do it. So give me a sense of your progression from
[Amit Varma]: there. Like where did you study and where did those paths take you?
[Guest]: So I studied, as I said, for the first till the 10th standard in Cochin. After that, I
[Guest]: went to Kodaikanal for two years and studied in school there to finish up my 12th standard.
[Guest]: Then I went to St. Stephen's College in Delhi to do physics. And I spent three wonderful
[Guest]: years there. I'd lived all my life before that in the south of India. So to sort of
[Guest]: go to the north for the first time was, you know, sort of brought new horizons to me.
[Guest]: And I had made many friends who I remained close to. And, you know, they were people
[Guest]: from very different backgrounds from me, but we happened to be all in a hostel together.
[Guest]: I liked them very much. And it was, again, very different for me to someone who sort
[Guest]: of, you know, this sort of culture leap from going from south to the north. I enjoy speaking
[Guest]: Hindi, so that was certainly something that I enjoyed doing.
[Guest]: Delhi at that time, in the mid-80s, was a special place. I mean, now when you look at
[Guest]: it, it's crowded, it's dusty, it's got flyovers all over, but there's still little
[Guest]: sparks of that magic around. But it was a much more magical place in the 80s than it
[Guest]: is now, in terms of music. So my uncle in Delhi was a musicologist and a writer on
[Guest]: music. So he would write for multiple newspapers, including the Hindustan Times and the Express.
[Guest]: So together with him, I would go to practically any significant music concert in Delhi. Over
[Guest]: that period of three years, I must have attended hundreds of concerts. So listening to music
[Guest]: was very much a part, you know, dash off from, leave college and then go for a concert somewhere.
[Guest]: And I met many, many musicians at that time, really the most remarkable musicians of that
[Guest]: time, just because I was in his proximity and I managed to do that. So again, from that
[Guest]: point of view, Delhi was special. It was also a turbulent time for India. Two months after
[Guest]: I reached Delhi, Mrs. Gandhi was assassinated. So to come to a city and then be under curfew,
[Guest]: see the smoke rise in the distance far away, hear about the really terrible things that
[Guest]: were going on. When it happens, you don't know what actually is going to happen, what
[Guest]: the future holds for you. All of this goes into making you. I remember that period as
[Guest]: being fundamental in transforming my idea of India, what it was, what it could be, in
[Guest]: a way that I hadn't really anticipated it in growing up in the idyllic South.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on that or your understanding of the idea of India as it were and what did
[Guest]: those times have to do with it?
[Guest]: Being in one of the better colleges in India and sort of surrounded by people of a certain
[Guest]: intellectual level, plus the fact that there was a lot of activity that was going on. Stephens
[Guest]: had this practice by which they would invite very eminent people to come and speak to them
[Guest]: off the record and then they would address questions to them. So I saw a whole bunch
[Guest]: of people at that time who were very impressive and so that understanding how dialogue and
[Guest]: thoughts about India were formed was important to me.
[Guest]: My friends were very important because through them I got a glimpse of what India was like.
[Guest]: So one thinks about Stephens as a place which is elite and certainly that that is true.
[Guest]: But if you looked at the physics class that I came from, many people came from relatively
[Guest]: unprivileged backgrounds. They studied in science schools and they came because they
[Guest]: were just very very clever and very very accomplished in what they did. So we had this strange mix
[Guest]: of people who came from more privileged, less privileged backgrounds all together learning
[Guest]: from each other and many of my classmates have of course gone on to do, you know, very
[Guest]: interesting and are all very accomplished in their own right now. But it's interesting
[Guest]: to see that we were all formed in that same crucible, talking to each other, learning
[Guest]: from each other at that time.
[Guest]: I think for me when I talked about the idea of India, I really meant music and the fact
[Guest]: that this was such an incredible uniter of people. I remember Kumar Gandharva concerts
[Guest]: late at night in in Kamani Auditorium or wherever it was. You know, people just filling the
[Guest]: aisles, filling the sides of the stage, waiting for him to come on. This magical moment of
[Guest]: about five, ten minutes when you'd heard the sound of the tanpura. He used many tanpuras
[Guest]: with a very beautiful sound that came before he started and this complete concentration
[Guest]: with both him and the audience were engaged in with the music. So the idea of what makes
[Guest]: India special, how is it that Indian music and Hindustani music is really a part of what
[Guest]: makes us. It concerns the fact that Hindu, Muslim, none of this makes any difference
[Guest]: in terms of our devotion to the idea of music as a cultural uniter and the way we express
[Guest]: it. Then Kumar Gandharva used to sing with folk, used to incorporate many folk elements
[Guest]: and folk melodies into his music. And again, that's a very different part of the sort of
[Guest]: normal, very different from the normal Khyal, Thumri history that is really at the core
[Guest]: of it. So to re-conceptualize, where does creativity come from in a specific Indian
[Guest]: context? All of these were sort of forming vaguely in my head at that point, waiting
[Guest]: to be crystallized, waiting to be put together.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a beautiful thought. And it's the first time I've heard this sense of Indian
[Amit Varma]: music being an emblem of an idea of India. And the moment you said it, I was like, wow,
[Amit Varma]: that's actually true. Because I think the best parts of the idea of India, the inclusiveness,
[Amit Varma]: this delightful Khichri where people feel free to take from whatever tradition and there
[Amit Varma]: is no other per se, there in our music, which is such a lovely thought. Another question
[Amit Varma]: to sort of add on to that, you were mentioning Stephens and how, you know, so many of your
[Amit Varma]: friends there are so prominent today and all of that. I did an episode with Ram Guha in
[Amit Varma]: December. Ram, of course, went to college in Delhi in the 70s, perhaps a decade before
[Amit Varma]: you essentially. And one of the strands that came up, and this struck me when I was reading
[Amit Varma]: his latest book on cricket, is that so many of the people in college with him at that
[Amit Varma]: time are prominent elites today. And if I remember correctly, he kind of agreed with
[Amit Varma]: the thesis that in those days with opportunities not being so many, it was this narrow bunch
[Amit Varma]: of elites who went to the same bunch of, you know, really good colleges, whether they are
[Amit Varma]: Stephens in Hindu, Xavier's in Bombay, Presidency in Calcutta, who would eventually become prominent
[Amit Varma]: in whatever fields. And that is something that hopefully I would imagine has kind of
[Amit Varma]: changed today. What is your kind of sense of that? Like when you look at the landscape
[Amit Varma]: around you, when you look at all of the prominent people, you know, I'm guessing that at some
[Amit Varma]: level you have some kind of shared background with all of them in terms of colleges or common
[Amit Varma]: friends or whatever. And it's a small world, but it won't be the case 30 years later where
[Guest]: it will be a broader world or will it? I would be very happy if it was not the case 30 years
[Guest]: later. We are all children of privilege. And as I grow older, I recognize that much more.
[Guest]: And I mean, the fact that I came from a family that could afford books, that was interested
[Guest]: in the idea of learning, that could expose me to all of these different influences at
[Guest]: an early point, shaping me. It's not as though somebody else in that situation would not
[Guest]: have done exactly or even better than me. And I recognize that really, you know, I'm
[Guest]: grateful for that privilege. I'm a bit ashamed of it in a sense, because I recognize that
[Guest]: many people would have done better than me in that particular situation had they had
[Guest]: that particular set of circumstances. And I do see going forward, I do want to see a
[Guest]: much more regalitarian India. I want to see people from remote parts of India, not just
[Guest]: people who privilege go to one particular college. I want to see them in the places
[Guest]: that I am and whatever it is that one can do, one has to do that because it's fundamental
[Amit Varma]: to justice and fairness. Another stand that struck me from what you were talking about
[Amit Varma]: is the time when you reached Delhi and you could see smoke rising in the distance and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. And it's a difficult time. And very soon the difficult time kind of goes
[Amit Varma]: away and it's a return to normality for most people, you know, it's like the old normal
[Amit Varma]: is a new normal again, in a sense. And, you know, I have some memory of the times because
[Amit Varma]: I was a kid, you know, we were in Chandigarh at that time, and later we moved to Pune.
[Amit Varma]: But when we were in Chandigarh, we used to go to Delhi quite often. So I have some memory
[Amit Varma]: of the time as well. And it is that there is this period and it passes and then there's
[Amit Varma]: a return to normality. And it's as if it never happened. And we heal, you know, the fact
[Amit Varma]: that Manmohan Singh became PM a couple of decades later and all of that. Is there an
[Amit Varma]: analogue with that? For example, what is happening in these COVID times, maybe even between the
[Amit Varma]: first and the second wave, that at some point people just internalise the thing that okay,
[Amit Varma]: the worst is behind us, the lockdown is over, everything is done. And I'm not specifically
[Amit Varma]: asking about COVID, which we'll discuss in detail, but just about the mindset that people
[Guest]: kind of have. I think it's essential for sort of psychological survival, to make sure that
[Guest]: you don't carry the weight of terrible events too far ahead. And I think that's why we all
[Guest]: adjust and we all find ways of dealing with this. Regarding COVID specifically, I think
[Guest]: the impact of COVID will last for some time. Because there's never been something that
[Guest]: has really been countrywide, whether you go to Bengal, whether Maharashtra, whether Karnataka,
[Guest]: whether Delhi, whether that, the images of funeral pyres, of bodies stacked up waiting
[Guest]: to be cremated. And just, you know, the fact that now we all know people around us who
[Guest]: died early, who need not have died at that point, but they had, they contacted COVID
[Guest]: and because they were in that circumstance at that time, they passed away needlessly
[Guest]: in some cases. I think these scars will last for a long time. There will be psychological
[Guest]: scars and mental health in the aftermath of a pandemic, not so much while people cope
[Guest]: with things while they're happening. It's after that, that the survivors have to cope
[Guest]: with what happened before and figure out their own psychological, mental coping strategies
[Guest]: to deal with this. And this is something that we really need to appreciate going forward.
[Guest]: It's going to be difficult.
[Amit Varma]: It struck me that we have never seen such a sort of collective trauma since partition.
[Amit Varma]: But in one way, this is worse because partition was like a few areas, whereas this touches,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the remotest part. I mean, just scrolling through Twitter alone, just my Twitter
[Amit Varma]: timeline every day is just completely harrowing for me because the kind of images that one
[Amit Varma]: sees are stunning. And I do not know one single friend who is completely unaffected by it
[Amit Varma]: somewhere or the other that, you know, things are happening. So it's quite horrendous. But
[Amit Varma]: to sort of move back to your personal journey before we come back to COVID again, it intrigues
[Amit Varma]: me that you are a professor of both physics and biology. Tell me a bit about that. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a bit about how, you know, you became an expert in both these disciplines instead of
[Amit Varma]: just picking one. What drove you to do that? And what does this intersection then imply
[Amit Varma]: for, you know, the kind of work you do? I mean, what sets you apart from the physics
[Amit Varma]: guys and what sets you apart from the biology guys?
[Guest]: To answer that, I'll have to tell you a little bit more about my history.
[Guest]: So from Delhi, after doing a bachelor's BSc honours in physics, I moved to IIT Kanpur.
[Guest]: I spent two years in IIT Kanpur doing a master's in physics. At the end of that, I had a sort
[Guest]: of choice about what physics I wanted to do because physics is, of course, a very large
[Guest]: subject. And I'd always had a fascination until then for the more theoretical parts
[Guest]: of physics, the much more esoteric and mathematical parts of it. Quantum gravity was one thing
[Guest]: that I was interested in or that I felt I ought to be interested in because it sort
[Guest]: of sounded difficult and seemed to attack fundamental questions, etc. And then in the
[Guest]: last semester of my being at IIT Kanpur, I had this wonderful course taught by a professor
[Guest]: called Jayanta Bhattacharya, who later became director of various well-known institutions
[Guest]: in the country. But he was an amazing teacher. So I sat in the class and I said, look, this
[Guest]: is what I really want to do. And this is a field called statistical physics, which is
[Guest]: a very interesting part that overlaps many different areas. So having done that, I said
[Guest]: that, look, I first said, look, can I go and can I come and work with you for a PhD? And
[Guest]: he said, fine. And I joined IIT Kanpur briefly. But I'd also interviewed in a bunch of other
[Guest]: places including the Indian Institute of Science. So the Indian Institute of Science got back
[Guest]: to me a little late after I had joined IIT Kanpur and said that, look, you know, would
[Guest]: you be, would you consider joining as a PhD student? I'd interviewed earlier with them.
[Guest]: And so then I went to Professor Bhattacharya and I said, look, I have an offer here. What
[Guest]: do you think I should do? And he said, I think you should go there because these are the
[Guest]: people who are over there. They're so-and-so and so-and-so. They're very good. I think
[Guest]: you will enjoy it. This is a group that's the center of activity in the field of condensed
[Guest]: matter physics in India. So I upped and went there a little later. So I had various, others
[Guest]: of my batch had already joined. And that was a big, that was in a sense a pivotal decision
[Guest]: for me. The Indian Institute of Science then had pretty much the best physics department
[Guest]: in the areas that I was interested in at that point. It had amazing people. So not just
[Guest]: as physicists, but much of what I am as a person really owes to the people who taught
[Guest]: me and worked with me at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore. Okay, so this may
[Guest]: be a little esoteric for your listeners, but usually the relationship between a thesis
[Guest]: advisor and a student is a very personal thing. You know, you work with somebody, you interact
[Guest]: with them, you meet them regularly. But the Indian Institute of Science physics department
[Guest]: at that time was a very fluid department. You could be registered as a student with
[Guest]: someone, work with someone completely different. You could work with multiple people there.
[Guest]: So I was extremely fortunate that out of the six people in the department, I worked with
[Guest]: five of them, all on different problems together, learning from each something special, something
[Guest]: that they could uniquely do and contribute. So I view that as being very, very pivotal,
[Guest]: not just from the point of view of the science and the techniques that I learned, but also
[Guest]: from the quality of the people, their honesty, uprightness, their scientific rigor, and the
[Guest]: fact that they were, you know, not just boring scientists, but had multiple interests across
[Guest]: many different areas. They were very well read on their own. So the fact that you didn't
[Guest]: be a boring scientist, you know, really, really came to me then that it was important for
[Guest]: a scientist to learn about things that were outside what they were doing, to be able to
[Guest]: keep up that sense of wonder at this and to try and relate what they saw outside to the
[Guest]: things that they were doing. I think these are all important lessons that you sort of
[Guest]: pick up along the way. I had a bunch of very good friends at that time who still remain
[Guest]: my friends. And at that point, I was really thinking of doing nothing except physics.
[Guest]: I'd sort of begun to think about this field called biophysics, because that was the point
[Guest]: where many physicists had begun to move into this huge, grey, nebulous area between fields
[Guest]: called biophysics. So I thought of that, but, you know, I wasn't quite ready to make that
[Guest]: decision yet. So then from there, I went to the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
[Guest]: in Bombay, and I worked for two years there as what's called a postdoctoral fellow. And
[Guest]: there I was working largely with an experimental group, with both the people who did theoretical
[Guest]: work and people who did experimental work. And that was useful because that was the first
[Guest]: time that I actually worked, understood what a theoretical person working with an experimental
[Guest]: person meant, to see results as they came fresh off from whatever work that was done
[Guest]: by the student the previous night. And we had to look at it and try and understand,
[Guest]: decipher what all of this meant. I made one particular connection with a person who I
[Guest]: discussed a whole lot of physics. This is Professor Shobha Bhattacharya, who later became
[Guest]: director of the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research. And again, the style of doing physics,
[Guest]: the style of how an experimentalist thinks, which became very important to me. And after
[Guest]: that, I think much of what happened after that is really reflects that interaction.
[Guest]: I realised that it doesn't make sense of my style of doing physics involves understanding
[Guest]: experimental data and trying to put a theoretical cloth on it and trying to understand where
[Guest]: the different bones actually fitted together. And that's what really is my trajectory
[Guest]: after that, doing exactly this. A few more details, which I can fill you in. I have some
[Guest]: amount of career before I get to the biology. From there, I moved to Canada. I worked in
[Guest]: Vancouver for a couple of years. And that's when I made the move towards thinking about
[Guest]: more biology problems. And these were problems that had to do with how cells move things
[Guest]: inside them. And that was an interesting sort of area to mine for a while. When I came back
[Guest]: to India after that, I joined the Institute of Mathematical Sciences. I kept both of these
[Guest]: up at the same time. I was doing some sort of regular physics things, as well as sort
[Guest]: of this introductory biological calculations as well. And then I gradually shifted over
[Guest]: to thinking more and more about biology. That's the point at which I really made the transition.
[Guest]: And as I said, in the beginning, because biology seemed exciting, afterwards, because there
[Guest]: were these huge questions in it, all of this completely unexplored areas, that, you know,
[Guest]: physics is a sort of well-trodden path. People knew what to do. Here, you had to make up
[Guest]: your own calculations as you went along. You had to decide what you could calculate and
[Guest]: what you could make a difference with. And that was very different.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just going to, you know, pick up a couple of strands and think aloud here. One,
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about the importance of the interaction between the theoretical and the practical
[Amit Varma]: aspects of physics, that as a theoretical person, you are constantly getting feedback
[Amit Varma]: and having to modify your assumptions and all of that. And it strikes me, and I want
[Amit Varma]: to talk about your modelling also at a later point, but it strikes me that when you're
[Amit Varma]: modelling also, that's an essential part of what you're doing, that you can't be married
[Amit Varma]: to assumptions. You are constantly updating, you know, whatever is in your model, you're
[Amit Varma]: constantly updating your theory. And therefore, a certain humility is a prerequisite for that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I imagine that as individuals, one can go in different directions when one is studying
[Amit Varma]: whatever. One is that you can get a certain amount of knowledge, allow that to go to your
[Amit Varma]: head, form a certain vision of the world, get stuck to it, become dogmatic, follow certain
[Amit Varma]: paths, you know, and become kind of that kind of person. Or on the other hand, you can just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, retain a lot of humility, always be willing to accept that you're wrong, which
[Amit Varma]: I guess all scientists are to an extent, and always be willing to accept that you're wrong,
[Amit Varma]: sort of keep interfacing with the outside world. Now, what I see kind of in your history
[Amit Varma]: is one that you are not just someone doing science, you know, you've grown up reading,
[Amit Varma]: you've grown up immersed in the world of music, and you pointed out that there were all these
[Amit Varma]: wonderful people with varied interests, who you also learned a lot from. And secondly,
[Amit Varma]: this kind of interaction where you're keeping an open mind, you're sort of in that exciting
[Amit Varma]: phase where you're kind of discovering the world and molding your theories to that. And
[Amit Varma]: to a large extent, you know, a lot of this could be happenstance, you could have been
[Amit Varma]: somewhere else, interacting with different kinds of people and all of that. So am I reading
[Amit Varma]: too much into this? Or is this really kind of essential in that sense? Could you have
[Amit Varma]: gone in a different direction if you were elsewhere? And are there people who don't
[Amit Varma]: have the similar kind of humility and openness, you know, the way Kumar Ghandar would take
[Amit Varma]: things from here and there and be open to everything? I guess some scientists are also
[Amit Varma]: like that and some are not, you know, as someone who doesn't know about the field, forgive
[Guest]: me for this naive question, but what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: I wouldn't call it so much humility, I would say personality. There are people whose personalities
[Guest]: are very focused to understanding one thing, they become experts in it, that's what they
[Guest]: enjoy and they sort of thrive within that sort of limited area that they have carved
[Guest]: out from themselves. They make an international name as experts in that particular area. I'm
[Guest]: more of a gadfly. I like to take things from different parts. I get bored with doing something
[Guest]: for too long. I'm interested in new problems. It's just a sort of, it's really just personalities
[Guest]: and every scientist has a sort of unique personality and the way in which they decide how to approach
[Guest]: a problem. I've often kicked myself and said, why do you want to do all of this new stuff?
[Guest]: Because you know, this is stressful, you're going to have to learn new things, you're
[Guest]: going to have to learn a new language. And the great French physicist Pierre-Gilles
[Guest]: Desgenes actually said that changing a field is like going to a new country and learning
[Guest]: a new language. And that really is true. It's stressful, you know, you have to sort of decide
[Guest]: is it worth it or not? Am I not just happy here? But there are parts of my personality
[Guest]: that are fed by the desire to learn something new, to see whether what I know can be applied
[Guest]: to that. And partly I guess we'll get to the COVID-19 a little later, but also the desire
[Guest]: to do something concrete that will help the country in whatever way it can be done. I
[Guest]: mean, that sounds a little vague and a little too general, but that also was a motivation
[Guest]: for what I did over the last five to 10 years after that, after I started doing all of these
[Amit Varma]: physics and biology things that I told you about.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I guess at some level, this is like what Isaiah Berlin said about the fox and
[Amit Varma]: the hedgehog, but does taking multiple perspectives into these different fields, like taking,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whatever you've learned about physics and stats and math and all of that into biology
[Amit Varma]: and vice versa, does it help you look at that particular field you're going to in a slightly
[Amit Varma]: different way in which say a specialist in that field who knows nothing else, who knows
[Amit Varma]: just that one big thing would kind of look at it. Do you feel that that kind of helped
[Amit Varma]: your perspectives because you're able to come at it from so many different directions and
[Amit Varma]: also do you think, I mean, apart from personality, do you think that there is a particular intellectual
[Amit Varma]: bent of mind or maybe a kind of rigor which makes a person able to do this? For example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, maybe like whenever I try to learn a new subject, what I always try to do is
[Amit Varma]: kind of go back to first principles and just try to understand it from its fundamentals,
[Amit Varma]: so to say. So is that a bent of mind also that is useful to you and that you find is
[Amit Varma]: inherent to you?
[Guest]: That's a great question. I think it's certainly true that as a scientist, as a physicist,
[Guest]: someone trained in physics, talking to someone in biology, I bring a perspective that is
[Guest]: very different. As a physicist, exactly as you said, you're trained to look at general
[Guest]: generality, the general description, to strip it away from all extraneous detail, to try
[Guest]: and say that this is what is going to be important, this is crucial, and we can forget about all
[Guest]: of this. The classically trained biologist, on the other hand, is very much a person of
[Guest]: detail. They know that these details matter, so they will have all of the very detailed,
[Guest]: complex biochemical understanding of whatever is going on from their observations. So the
[Guest]: dialogue between a biologist and a physicist always has to try and find a common ground
[Guest]: where the physicist has to engage with what is happening with the biology very specifically,
[Guest]: and the biologist has to be agreeable to saying that there is merit in stepping back and trying
[Guest]: to see what the bigger picture is. So I think the fact that I had a fairly broad training
[Guest]: in physics has been very valuable, because I know the standard bunch of tricks that one
[Guest]: is trained in, in terms of computational mathematics. And I can see that when I think about a problem
[Guest]: or discuss it with somebody, where something might fit in, what might be optimal, what
[Guest]: might work in this case. And that, I think, is the advantage of talking to other people,
[Guest]: because you can pick this up. It's good for both sides. One, as a physicist, you find
[Guest]: interesting problems that no one has looked at yet. And as a biologist, on the other side,
[Guest]: you find different ways of thinking about what it is that you're doing that may be important,
[Guest]: that may help your intuition, but will guide your experiments in a particular direction.
[Guest]: And I'm still not very good at it. I mean, you can, I'm not, I'm a trained biologist
[Guest]: who's gone through multiple years of a formal biology classroom. But I do understand what
[Guest]: is being said now, which would have been sort of earlier, more difficult earlier. And, you
[Guest]: know, I think we've sort of been learning on both sides.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me more about this field of biophysics. Perhaps I'm not a person of the sciences,
[Amit Varma]: so I haven't really heard much about this before, and it seems a very intriguing combination
[Amit Varma]: to me. So I'm a layman, so explain it in those terms. What is biophysics? Where is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where do the two come together? How would you describe it?
[Guest]: So the field that I'm interested in is more appropriately called physical biology. So that
[Guest]: takes a biological system and asks, where does the physics come in? At what points is
[Guest]: physics important to explain biological phenomena? So to give you an example, and of course,
[Guest]: it's a big mistake to ask me to explain what I do because, you know, I just sort of get
[Guest]: very happy and give you a half an hour seminar on that. But to give you a very quick summary
[Guest]: of the stuff that I'm interested in, you're made up of cells, I'm made up of cells, we're
[Guest]: all made up of cells. That's a sort of fundamental basic unit of life. The cells that make you
[Guest]: and me up have a cell nucleus. It's basically a sort of bag with stuff hanging on it. But
[Guest]: the nucleus is a little compact structure inside that contains the DNA. And the DNA
[Guest]: provides instructions for making new cells for the whole, what makes you you and me me
[Guest]: is contained in our DNA, apart from some influence from external sources. The DNA is contained
[Guest]: in a long molecule called chromosomes. And there are 23 pairs of chromosomes in all your
[Guest]: cells and all my cells. What determines where these chromosomes are placed inside this little
[Guest]: nuclear bag? And you might think that, look, they're just long molecules, you just mix
[Guest]: them. It looks like noodles or spaghetti. That's the sort of picture that you might
[Guest]: have mentally. Long molecules all together, mixed up together. What's the best analogy?
[Guest]: It would easily be baggy noodles inside a bowl. Turns out that's not true. There is
[Guest]: a certain relationship that different chromosomes bear with respect to each other. Some of them
[Guest]: like to be closer to the inside, some of them like to be further towards the outside. And
[Guest]: this can have very specific impacts on what the cell does, what sort of cell it is. Is
[Guest]: it a cell taken from your liver? Is it a cell taken from your skin? Is it a cell taken from
[Guest]: your brain? So these questions are really questions of physics because they're how do
[Guest]: molecules move around? How do molecules know where to go? What drives that? And of course
[Guest]: they have no brains. So what are the physical principles that tell a molecule of this large
[Guest]: chromosome to be near the outside versus near the inside? And what does this mean for how
[Guest]: we understand the biological functions of the chromosomes? These are questions that
[Guest]: are really set at the boundaries between physics and biology. There are no biological answers
[Guest]: to this question. And there are no physics answers to the question because it has to
[Guest]: come, the phenomena is intrinsically biological phenomena. So now you can see why it's necessary
[Guest]: to talk to each other and for the physicists to understand what the experiment was, what
[Guest]: led to this observation, and how do we understand this observation from a mathematical and computational
[Guest]: point of view. So that's my three minute elevator spiel on why I'm interested in this problem.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'd love to know more. It sounds incredibly fascinating. So one, what are the implications
[Amit Varma]: of this new field? And two, I imagine this new field would have emerged at a time when
[Amit Varma]: it becomes necessary for this new field to emerge to take human knowledge forward. So
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about, you know, the fundamental ways in which this is taking our
[Amit Varma]: knowledge forward and is actually having a practical impact on lives and the way perhaps
[Amit Varma]: we treat diseases or our understanding of the world. Tell me a little bit more actually.
[Guest]: Again with this example, sort of carrying on with this example, this is the prototype
[Guest]: of what the field does. You know that in cancers, you tend to multiply the number of chromosomes
[Guest]: inside your nucleus. And that's one gauge, one way you can tell if you have a cancer
[Guest]: or not, is just to look for an anomalous number of chromosomes inside. So what effect does
[Guest]: that have? If I just introduce multiple copies of chromosomes, let's say chromosome two,
[Guest]: chromosome five, chromosome seven, what effect does that have on what the cell is doing?
[Guest]: Why is it that those cells might be cancerous as opposed to other cells? What's going wrong
[Guest]: in the regulation that should normally have existed? There are other types of conditions.
[Guest]: Progeria, for example, which is a premature aging, is also linked to the way the chromosomes
[Guest]: attach to the outside of the nucleus, to the walls, to the interior walls of the nucleus.
[Guest]: So now you can understand where these sort of physical connections between molecules,
[Guest]: what contains them, etc. mean from a physics context and then ask what does it mean for
[Guest]: the biology? Why do these changes happen and what do they mean biologically for someone
[Guest]: with a condition like progeria or a condition like Down syndrome, which is a particular
[Guest]: chromosome having an extra copy? What goes on there? What are these questions that relate
[Guest]: these anomalies that you can see? They're biological anomalies, but they must have physical
[Guest]: origins. How do these tie together? In general, the background for this is a growing appreciation
[Guest]: of the fact that biology isn't just chemistry in a different context. For many years, it
[Guest]: was believed the whole of molecular biology goes back and tries to reduce the behaviour
[Guest]: of biological systems to molecules and how they interact with each other, the DNA molecules
[Guest]: and proteins, etc., etc. The physical biology part of it says it's not just molecules, it's
[Guest]: not just the way they interact with each other, but the way forces are exerted inside cells.
[Guest]: And the whole fact that you grew from just one fertilised egg into what you are now with
[Guest]: 10 trillion cells is itself an amazing act of how forces must be expanding, the baby
[Guest]: grows, the cells grow, but they all go in this very precisely orchestrated way. That's
[Guest]: called development. All of this must involve forces because cells must grow against each
[Guest]: other. Cells must receive mechanical cues from other cells in their vicinity. How is
[Guest]: all of this orchestrated? And how do we understand this whole phenomenon of life as being this
[Guest]: intersection of physics, of chemistry and biology together? This is really the excitement
[Amit Varma]: to the talk. No, no, it's so fascinating. You know, if I had heard you talk like this
[Amit Varma]: when I was 10 years old, I might just have gone further into this field because it's
[Amit Varma]: so fascinating. So tell me something, when we look back on medicine in the 19th century
[Amit Varma]: and we're like, you know, the cure for so many things was bloodletting. The germ theory
[Amit Varma]: of disease wasn't there. There's so much we didn't know. It seems entirely prehistoric
[Amit Varma]: today. And we often tend to assume by default as humans, because the future is unknown unknowns.
[Amit Varma]: We often tend to assume that we are at some kind of pinnacle of science, that earlier
[Amit Varma]: we were ignorant. Now we know it all. But the truth is that if we survive another couple
[Amit Varma]: of centuries, we'll probably look back on the 21st century and say, my God, what primitive
[Amit Varma]: people they knew nothing. So being at the cutting edge of this particular field, do
[Amit Varma]: you get that sense that we are just exploding, open these walls of knowledge and figuring
[Amit Varma]: out things we didn't know earlier? You know, people increasingly these days are talking
[Amit Varma]: about reversing aging, and even the horrible notion of how we could live forever as if
[Amit Varma]: I would even want to do that. What are your thoughts in that? I mean, just just thinking
[Amit Varma]: of it is enough to, of course, fill one with wonder. But, you know, as someone who is actually,
[Amit Varma]: you know, not a bystander, but working in these fields, thinking about them, understanding
[Guest]: them, what is your sense of what's going on? There's a strange paradox here. That is something
[Guest]: that we know very, very, very well. We sort of think of the 19th century as being the
[Guest]: century of engineering, where first the great engineering feats of building huge bridges
[Guest]: and roads, etc, were first accomplished. The 20th century is really the century of physics.
[Guest]: We figured out quantum mechanics. We figured out the fundamental laws that govern the world.
[Guest]: We explored the atom with greater and greater accuracy. And we can now calculate properties
[Guest]: of physical systems that are to nine decimal places. That's an amazing achievement. The
[Guest]: cosmic background radiation that comes to us from billions of years ago, that are received
[Guest]: in radio receivers on Earth, the spectrum of that we can calculate with such accuracy.
[Guest]: First of all, as an experimental measurement, the size of the little symbol that you use
[Guest]: to plot it is 100 times larger than the actual accuracy with which that measurement is made.
[Guest]: And we can fit that perfectly. So that's an amazing example of how physics actually works,
[Guest]: that it works. We know amply that it works and it works very well. This century is the
[Guest]: century of biology, and that's where the explosion is really going to happen. How do we understand
[Guest]: how systems develop? How do they start at single cell and become whole beings like you
[Guest]: and me? Can we replicate that at all inside the laboratory? Where does consciousness sit?
[Guest]: Is consciousness just a fact of the way our neurons are connected inside our brain? Is
[Guest]: there something else there? What determines that? Can it just connect in a little Petri
[Guest]: dish a bunch of neurons together? Will that be conscious? Will that not be conscious?
[Guest]: These are really the questions, especially disease, which certainly is one of the most
[Guest]: important questions of our time. Where do cancers come from? How do we treat them? What
[Guest]: do we understand? What goes wrong in someone growing that makes that little error, which
[Guest]: is then amplified and becomes a cancer? What about Alzheimer's disease? As you know, we're
[Guest]: all growing older and older and older. The average lifespan on Earth is increasing. As
[Guest]: you grow older, there are diseases that are associated with ageing that are just more
[Guest]: likely if you survive till age 80, it's much more likely that you will get dementia than
[Guest]: if you were 20 years old. How do we understand that? Where do these diseases come from? How
[Guest]: do we treat them? Even if we don't want to live forever, how do we ensure that until
[Guest]: we until we die, we live comfortable, healthy lives until that particular point? These are
[Guest]: going to be issues going forward. And that's where the real frontiers are.
[Amit Varma]: Let's also talk about math, because, you know, math is something that you've delved deeply
[Amit Varma]: into as much as physics or biology, though one could argue that it's a part of both and
[Amit Varma]: everything is interconnected. And I also find it fascinating because one, you could argue
[Amit Varma]: that given sufficient knowledge, you can explain all of the universe and perhaps even all of
[Amit Varma]: what is going to happen through eternity just using math. But at the same time, because
[Amit Varma]: we do not have that knowledge, we therefore have to use the math to do a kind of probabilistic
[Amit Varma]: thinking. Like I read this superb book a few years ago called Super Forecasting by Philip
[Amit Varma]: Tetlock, which, you know, includes stuff on modeling and all of that. And at that time,
[Amit Varma]: I had been like a professional poker player for five years and all of that. And it seemed
[Amit Varma]: to come to the same conclusion that I had through my years of playing poker, that you
[Amit Varma]: have to think of the world in a probabilistic way. Now, human beings love stories that explain
[Amit Varma]: the world, they want certainty. And therefore, they'll think of the world in ways that mimic
[Amit Varma]: that in non probabilistic ways. Because after all, everything that has happened has happened,
[Amit Varma]: it's 100% that happened, right. But before it happened, there were probabilities involved.
[Amit Varma]: And I would say that probabilistic thinking is an implicit part of everything we do. Like
[Amit Varma]: I remember I once wrote a column about why we should not stigmatize gambling. The poker,
[Amit Varma]: of course, is a game of skill. But my point was that everything is gambling, that when
[Amit Varma]: you choose to cross the road, that is a gamble, because there are probabilities associated
[Amit Varma]: with how often you will get run over or how if you're in Warsaw, the tree in the middle
[Amit Varma]: of the road may fall on you, extremely low probability and all of that. You know, if
[Amit Varma]: you are a young single person, and you choose to go up to someone and introduce yourself,
[Amit Varma]: there's a probability there, there's a range of possibilities, as it were, you know, poker
[Amit Varma]: players love to talk in terms of ranges rather than specific hands. And it seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: one of the beauties of mathematics is that it fits real life in this beautiful way. And
[Amit Varma]: when you think about math explicitly, a lot of the implicit stuff because we are all gambling
[Amit Varma]: anyway, we are all modelers anyway, we are modeling what will happen into tomorrow when
[Amit Varma]: we choose to do something today, but we're doing it in imprecise ways. We're not thinking
[Amit Varma]: about it. But actually forcing yourself to think about it and think in probabilistic
[Amit Varma]: terms makes you much more clear about a lot of things in your head if you start doing
[Amit Varma]: that. So you know, I know I'm rambling a bit, but you know, this was one of the big revelations
[Amit Varma]: that changed the way I look at the world in maybe the last decade or so. Now you are someone
[Amit Varma]: who is of course into modeling. But before we get into the nitty gritties of what modeling
[Amit Varma]: involves and how you learned it and how you got into it, just give me your sense of overall
[Amit Varma]: aspect of it. And do you think that, you know, learning how to model, figuring out modeling
[Amit Varma]: and all of that also changed you as a person in some ways?
[Guest]: That's a great question. And it's also sort of part of what I teach in my undergraduate
[Guest]: courses here at Ashoka University, the nature of randomness, the nature of chance and how
[Guest]: to deal with it and how to make statistical statements about it. So the field in which
[Guest]: I was trained, which is statistical physics, really has all of these components in it.
[Guest]: It has a lot of randomness. And then you ask from this randomness, how does some sort of
[Guest]: order emerge? How can you understand emergent order from structures that are intrinsically
[Guest]: very random? And I think that's an important philosophical point at which physics begins
[Guest]: to connect to many other fields. Because, you know, look at us, we're extremely ordered
[Guest]: structures. We have noses and eyes and ears in exact locations. But the laws of physics
[Guest]: finally are completely, you know, immutable and you need them to put the structure together.
[Guest]: So how does that actually work is an important and really very crucial point that you made.
[Guest]: So it's very much a part of what I do. And in a sense, I realize I've always been a modeler.
[Guest]: I now talk, I now refer to myself as a mathematical modeler now. But I've really always been doing
[Guest]: mathematical modeling. There's no, I mean, it's just we didn't talk of it that way earlier.
[Guest]: But it's just trying to understand the observations about the world around you in some sort of
[Guest]: mathematical framework. And this is a framework that, as you said, uses probability, uses
[Guest]: statistics as well, as well as uses the laws of physics. And that's really the best way
[Guest]: of describing it.
[Amit Varma]: And just an aside, when we speak of randomness, isn't that randomness really a result of our
[Amit Varma]: own ignorance? Like, for example, is there free will? If you could know everything that
[Amit Varma]: was knowable, would it not be obvious what is going to happen in the next moment and
[Amit Varma]: so on? You know, the arguments against free will. So where do you kind of stand on it?
[Guest]: You're plunging deep into philosophical debate on this question. I think the current understanding
[Guest]: is that randomness is at the root of everything. It's really that there are fundamentally,
[Guest]: even though quantum mechanics prescribes in a deterministic manner what's going to unfold
[Guest]: here, there are many limitations. You don't know the quantum mechanics of everything in
[Guest]: the universe. You just do the little thing that you're studying. And finally, from that
[Guest]: quantum mechanics comes probabilities of events because you cannot talk about the absolute
[Guest]: certainty except in very limited senses where you precisely prescribe the nature of the
[Guest]: quantum state of a particular particle.
[Guest]: So it's complicated. And I think quantum mechanics has contributed a lot to this debate around
[Guest]: what is known, what can we know, what is knowable. And even these ideas of chaos, chaos theory
[Guest]: in dynamical systems has told us about the very large sensitivity that even very simple
[Guest]: systems can have to how you start them off. Make tiny little changes and that amplifies
[Guest]: this butterfly effect that you can have it. Tiny changes here can have huge far-reaching
[Guest]: changes very far away. It's important, especially now, when people sort of imagine that there
[Guest]: is a logical sequence in which an epidemic unfolds and we should have known that and
[Guest]: models should have predicted it, etc. These are, at their heart, random events. They're
[Guest]: fundamentally unpredictable. And when we talk about COVID-19, maybe we'll get to some of
[Guest]: that particular question. But it's important that you raise that because that is really
[Guest]: very fundamental to the way we think about how complex systems behave.
[Amit Varma]: One final philosophical question. At a philosophical level, can something be truly random? I mean,
[Amit Varma]: it can be apparently random because we, of course, don't have knowledge. So many things
[Amit Varma]: will seem random to us. Like back in the day, I imagine, you know, whether it would rain
[Amit Varma]: tomorrow or not would seem random to a person. While today, you can kind of model that and
[Amit Varma]: have some kind of probabilistic prediction about whether it will rain tomorrow in Andheri,
[Amit Varma]: for example, or Kochi. Is the term randomness itself an illustration of the limitations
[Amit Varma]: of our knowledge? Or are there things that are actually truly random? And even if you
[Amit Varma]: knew what every atom in the universe was doing right now, there are still things that would
[Amit Varma]: happen the next moment that are actually random and unpredictable.
[Guest]: So that's a difficult question to answer because you have to answer it at a practical level.
[Guest]: How well should I know a particular system now in order to be able to predict it? Should
[Guest]: I know it to 100 decimal places or will 50 do? Or should it be a thousand? So the whole
[Guest]: idea behind chaos is that it doesn't matter how you can do it, 1000, 10,000, 5,000, et
[Guest]: cetera, decimal places that you can specify that I know the system that well. But finally,
[Guest]: it will degenerate into chaos that these trajectories that the possible system might unfold go further
[Guest]: and further away. The better you know it earlier, the more time it will take for that to happen.
[Guest]: But finally, it will happen. And at some point, it becomes a sort of a debate that cannot
[Guest]: be settled. Is there some truly underlying, perfectly deterministic theory of the universe
[Guest]: and everything in it? Or are you always going to be limited by the fact that there's no
[Guest]: paper long enough to write down all of the conditions on all of the atoms inside that
[Guest]: could enable you to make that decision? So right now, I think most scientists take a
[Guest]: practical point of view that life is fundamentally stochastic and unpredictable. The system that
[Guest]: you're studying, you can control them to some extent and insulate them from external influence
[Guest]: for the purpose of your measurement. But in most cases in practical world, you cannot
[Guest]: do that. There are just too many imponderables, which is why you need statistical descriptions
[Amit Varma]: of phenomena around you. Fabulous. You know, if your undergraduate courses were online,
[Amit Varma]: I'd absolutely take them because this is so fascinating. But let's move on to modeling.
[Amit Varma]: Now, tell me a little bit more about this and how you've got deeper into modeling. And
[Amit Varma]: I guess that will, at some level, bring us to what you've been doing in the last 10 years
[Amit Varma]: and just modeling disease and epidemics and so on. So tell me a bit more about that.
[Guest]: As I said, my training as a theoretical physicist is really a training and as theoretical physicists
[Guest]: who work with experiments, whether they're physics experiments or biology experiments,
[Guest]: it's really a question of taking a lot of complexity and trying to distill it into some
[Guest]: compact mathematical description, which can then be used to predict what might be happening
[Guest]: or to understand what might be happening. So that's a general theme that every modeler
[Guest]: is about. To come more to sort of modeling as I use it now, I have to tell you a little
[Guest]: bit more about history. I think beyond, after I spent about five to seven years as a young
[Guest]: faculty member, doing sort of standard things that faculty, young faculty members do in
[Guest]: terms of research and teaching, I realized that there was some part of me that still
[Guest]: needed to be satisfied in terms of the fact that I was doing things that were academic,
[Guest]: but in some sort of academic sense, these were useful academic things to do. But I began
[Guest]: to wonder whether I could and should do something more for the nation I was embedded in, for
[Guest]: the people around me. So that's when we began thinking a little bit, colleagues of mine
[Guest]: and I, about looking at infectious diseases as a problem that one could potentially hope
[Guest]: to make some progress with in terms of a modeling framework. So between 2005 and 2016, we organized
[Guest]: three different meetings. So we were just coming at it out of the blue. We just said
[Guest]: that, look, we have some funding in our institute to support these meetings. Let's just have
[Guest]: a meeting on modeling infectious diseases. Let's get people interested in modeling from
[Guest]: all over the country who we knew. Let's get people, clinical people, let's get people
[Guest]: who work on the public health front, get them together and just see if they can talk to
[Guest]: each other. So we used to have little tutorial sessions before that, and then we used to
[Guest]: have a little conference where people would talk about real work. And we did this in 2006,
[Guest]: 2010, 2016, etc. And by the time, the last time we did it, we had a whole lot of people
[Guest]: coming in from outside. We had a bunch of people coming from the Rund School of Hygiene
[Guest]: and Tropical Medicine and Imperial College to come and give lectures and be part of this
[Guest]: discussion. And we slowly began to realize that there wasn't a strong modeling community
[Guest]: in the country, which was alert to what information was there in the public health domain, trying
[Guest]: to understand what India could and should do. Most of the models on Indian data come
[Guest]: from outside India. And, you know, there were people in India doing in quotes modeling,
[Guest]: but these were all somewhat rarefied, more mathematical, and very little of it had the
[Guest]: real connection to the problems of India, specifically in the field of public health
[Guest]: infectious diseases. So from there, that's an imperceptible move in which I was doing
[Guest]: biophysics and doing a little bit of this at the time. I also taught this course a couple
[Guest]: of times, I taught modeling infectious diseases and epidemiology a couple of times in a bunch
[Guest]: of different places. And then I realized, you know, what the tools that went into this,
[Guest]: what they were, what these techniques were, and I realized they weren't very far away
[Guest]: from what the stuff that I had been doing earlier. This is also just part of a larger
[Guest]: question of how do you begin to model systems. And if you're trained in modeling, you can
[Guest]: understand how this modeling is done. Then after thinking about these questions, I realized
[Guest]: that maybe the other interest ought to be policy, because finally you can do mathematics,
[Guest]: you can do modeling, you can talk to people, you can see what you're doing. But the only
[Guest]: point at which you can really intersect, you can do things useful, is when you try and
[Guest]: see how you can convert this into some sort of policy suggestion in a way that is acceptable,
[Guest]: in a way that has a chance of working, because all of this has to float up until someone
[Guest]: implements it, decides to choose it. So what is the interplay between models and policy?
[Guest]: I think that's really where I am at now. How does one use mathematical modeling of diseases,
[Guest]: public health situations, etc., so as to motivate better policy? How can policy take in information
[Guest]: that is mathematical in nature, that projects what might happen in the future, that explains
[Guest]: what is going on, and gives you a sort of analytic framework or bones with which to
[Guest]: make decisions? Now this is hard because policymakers are not necessarily accustomed to looking
[Guest]: at mathematical models when they make decisions. So there's also a question of how do you describe
[Guest]: what you do in such a way that a policymaker understands that it is important, understands
[Guest]: that it fulfills a certain very definite need, and they can then incorporate it into the
[Guest]: stuff they're actually doing. So that sort of is my history over the last couple of years,
[Guest]: and part of my reason for my move to Ashoka University, where I am now, because I felt
[Guest]: that talking about policy would be easier in a place that had policy chops in this area,
[Guest]: and where I could talk to multiple people across multiple departments. The whole field
[Guest]: of public health is very interdisciplinary. You need economics there, you need some sense
[Guest]: of history of what's happened in the historical background, you need people from multiple
[Guest]: departments, you need to talk to biologists with experience in immunology, if you want
[Guest]: to look at what happens in infectious disease. So you need to talk to ecologists, especially
[Guest]: to disease ecologists, who want to look at what are the consequences for disease of changes
[Guest]: in the ecology. So this, you know, suddenly your horizon, and I discovered that it just
[Guest]: became so much more broader. I was talking to people that I had never imagined I would
[Guest]: talk to five years before that, or ten years before that, and then I began to slowly understand
[Guest]: the scope of this field and what exactly this complexity meant. And the fact that to be
[Guest]: really serious about understanding disease in the Indian context, you had to weave a
[Guest]: whole lot of different strands together that I was only, you know, imperfectly aware of
[Guest]: earlier and even now and somewhat imperfectly aware of.
[Amit Varma]: A few questions and, you know, forgive me if they sound a little naive as I'm trying
[Amit Varma]: to kind of get to grips with the subject. But the first one is that modeling would basically
[Amit Varma]: be that you take a bunch of data and you figure out ways in which the data interact and then
[Amit Varma]: you try to model what will happen as time goes by. Now a couple of elements come into
[Amit Varma]: it and the first element is that to improve your model, to improve whatever you're coming
[Amit Varma]: up with, you need to iterate constantly, keep changing the data, iterate all the time. And
[Amit Varma]: if you are at the same time, interacting with policymakers, you know, in the real world,
[Amit Varma]: there's kind of no iteration, you need to decide what to do right now. How does one
[Amit Varma]: solve that problem? Because, you know, as we've seen in the past, like there's a famous
[Amit Varma]: case of how another modeler, Neil Ferguson, about 15 years ago, said that, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: the bird flu happened, said that around 200 million people would probably die from it.
[Amit Varma]: And actually around 300 people died from it, which is kind of a stark difference. And that's
[Amit Varma]: obviously that there is something there in the assumptions which is wrong, there is something
[Amit Varma]: there in the, you know, the data which is wrong, which didn't work out, and it's an
[Amit Varma]: honest error and can happen. And if it's a purely theoretical activity that doesn't really
[Amit Varma]: have a huge impact on the real world. But when you're going to make policy decisions
[Amit Varma]: on the basis of these models, you could go terribly wrong. For example, you could order
[Amit Varma]: a crazy stringent lockdown, which has massive economic costs on the basis of a model that
[Amit Varma]: was flawed to begin with. Not that I'm saying that, but that's what happened last year,
[Amit Varma]: you know, as we're seeing now, you know, without the lockdown, things could even have been
[Amit Varma]: much worse. So I'm not sort of making a specific sort of reference to COVID itself, which is
[Amit Varma]: hopelessly complicated. And we'll only be able to figure out which decisions were good
[Amit Varma]: or bad in hindsight. And we'll come to that later. But in general, about modelling, like,
[Amit Varma]: that's my first of kind of two questions that how do we sort of then get past this, that
[Amit Varma]: we know models are useful. And we know that politicians are actually modelling every time
[Amit Varma]: they make a decision, except that they're not using data, they're just using guesswork
[Amit Varma]: and assumptions and biases and all of that. And then they're deciding, we should do this.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously, using a mathematical model is better. But at the same time, models become
[Amit Varma]: better and better and better, the more iteration there is, where, you know, in the real world,
[Amit Varma]: that becomes a limitation. So what's your view on that?
[Guest]: All of them are great questions. And which is why I say that modelling cannot be an exercise
[Guest]: that is done in the vacuum. Modelling has to refer to a whole bunch of people with a
[Guest]: vested interest in understanding what the outcomes might be. You must talk to the public
[Guest]: health specialists who see a disease increasing in numbers. You must talk to the immunologists
[Guest]: who try and understand, you know, how does it affect your body? And how does your immune
[Guest]: system react? And is there any pre-existing immunity that you might have to that particular
[Guest]: disease? You must talk to disease biologists who sort of are familiar with how infection
[Guest]: might happen, consequences of a particular disease. You must go back in history to ask
[Guest]: what's most similar to this pathogen. You must talk to the biologists who say, is this
[Guest]: a new virus? Is this an old virus? How much has changed? And you must talk to ecologists
[Guest]: who will tell you that this came from animals into human beings through what's called a
[Guest]: spillover event.
[Guest]: So the important point that I want to make here, which I think is crucial to answering
[Guest]: your question, is that modelling should not be done in vacuums. It's not as though Mr.
[Guest]: Ferguson or whoever it is, can sit and write down equations and do computer programs without
[Guest]: being very, very, very careful about the numbers that enter those models, the assumptions that
[Guest]: enter those models. And that's why you need groups of people working on this together.
[Guest]: And these groups should not just be a monoculture of people all of who think in the same way.
[Guest]: You need to have a fertilization of people from very, very different areas to try and
[Guest]: do the right smell test on what the model is, what it predicts, what it might do in
[Guest]: the future.
[Guest]: The other statement you made is very correct. The politician makes a model, but we all make
[Guest]: models. All of us are sort of thinking, if I go out tomorrow, will they catch COVID?
[Guest]: If I go to the shop, what is the probability? Will they wear masks? Is there going to be
[Guest]: a big crowd? Is there a line? We're all trying to predict what happens in the future based
[Guest]: on our experience of the past, based on the input that is coming to us all the time.
[Guest]: But there are questions that only models can answer. For example, how much, what is the
[Guest]: amount of remdesivir that the state of Kerala should order, given that the state of Kerala
[Guest]: orders let's say one month at a time or two months at a time from its suppliers? How much
[Guest]: should it order? Now that's a question that really relies on where do you think cases
[Guest]: are going to go. If cases have been downtrending for the last three weeks, you don't want to
[Guest]: buy a big order of remdesivir and waste all your budget on that. If you think they're
[Guest]: going up, but they're going to come down in a day or two, you might structure your order
[Guest]: differently. If you see it going up relentlessly at a certain rate between now and the end
[Guest]: of a month, you're going to order a completely different quantity.
[Guest]: So that's where the numbers begin to matter. And that's where the numbers that you put
[Guest]: into a model cannot be a matter of intuition anymore. You can't say, okay, I'm going to
[Guest]: order so many strips of this from my supplier, because I have a general feeling that that
[Guest]: should be right. You don't want to run out of potentially useful medicines. I mean, forget
[Guest]: about whether remdesivir is useful outside a very specific clinical context. I'm just
[Guest]: using it as an example. These things need mathematical bones to be put upon them. The
[Guest]: bones are determined by the way you structure your model, what you think is important, what
[Guest]: you want to leave out. It may turn out that you left out something very important, but
[Guest]: then you wait for people to tell you that. And then you publish your model so that people
[Guest]: can comment upon it and say, look, this looks like a terrible mistake. We need to do this.
[Guest]: Or they can write their own version of your model and say, we tweak it in this way. This
[Guest]: is a little better representation of what is actually going on. But the problem that
[Guest]: modelers face, especially modelers of disease, is that you're always trying to ask what's
[Guest]: going to happen in the future. And there are many things that come into that. We'll probably
[Guest]: talk about it a little later when we talk about more specifically COVID things. But
[Guest]: if all of those terrible things that ensued actually happened, that would be a terrible
[Guest]: thing indeed. So it's the job of the modeler to be proved wrong whenever the modeler says
[Guest]: something that points to death and devastation as a consequence of a pandemic. That's a modeler's
[Guest]: job to insist that you do something now so that what happens in the future can be averted.
[Guest]: And one has to think about models in that way. They're counterfactual. They tell you
[Guest]: what might happen if a particular course of action was done, or if you did not do particular
[Guest]: things at particular times. And that should be impetus to do those things at those times,
[Guest]: for example, a lockdown or quarantining, et cetera, so that those things don't happen.
[Guest]: And then in a sense, the model is wrong because what it predicted didn't happen. But you're
[Guest]: very happy and the modeler is also very happy that they didn't happen because this was a
[Guest]: sort of situation where it was a counterfactual situation. If you assume you don't do anything,
[Amit Varma]: this is what will actually ensue. And it's also very hard to say that someone
[Amit Varma]: who's making a probabilistic prediction is wrong per se. Like I might say that X has
[Amit Varma]: a 80% chance of happening, Y has a 20% chance of happening. If Y happens, that doesn't mean
[Amit Varma]: I was wrong. It just means that that 20% kind of worked out randomness as it were. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: the other way of looking at it, it seems is that when I argue that we should read more,
[Amit Varma]: I keep telling my writing students in the class that I teach that, you know, how do
[Amit Varma]: we paint a picture of the world? We paint it by joining dots. And the more dots we have,
[Amit Varma]: the more high definition our picture will be. And the only way to gather dots is by
[Amit Varma]: reading more. But it seems to me that here also, the way of generating the best models is like
[Amit Varma]: you said, by getting a lot of dots from a lot of places and just doing that. And it also worries
[Amit Varma]: me that simplistic models in the past that might have gone wrong can just give the whole field of
[Amit Varma]: modelling a bad name, which is kind of silly because we are all modelling anyway. So you
[Amit Varma]: might as well try to be as precise as you can. The other question I had about modelling in
[Amit Varma]: particular is that when you're modelling anything in India, your limitation is data because obviously
[Amit Varma]: you're feeding in data and you know, garbage in garbage out, you need decent data to be able to
[Amit Varma]: understand what is happening. Like one reason people are speculating about why the second wave
[Amit Varma]: blindsided so many people is that we didn't have accurate enough data to understand the first wave
[Amit Varma]: to begin with. Now in the context of a place like India, where not only is one data not available
[Amit Varma]: because of incompetence, but it is also increasingly being suppressed because certain narratives,
[Amit Varma]: you know, are more in the interest of the people who govern us or, you know, govern us,
[Amit Varma]: quote unquote. So how does one get past this? Like I assume in many ways, like economists in India,
[Amit Varma]: for example, will always have to look for proxies for economic data because the GDP has become such
[Amit Varma]: a corrected measure. So in the context of say infectious disease in India, if you're trying
[Amit Varma]: to model that or just what has happened in COVID in the last year, how does one deal with this?
[Guest]: So it's a bit paradoxical that there is some amount of data that is available.
[Guest]: It's not available in the most convenient way. For example, the National Center for Disease
[Guest]: Control has a weekly report that covers every district in India that reports on how many cases
[Guest]: of influenza, something else, H1N1, whatever it is, cholera, etc. came up. So that is very granular
[Guest]: data. It's the data at the level of 740 districts in India on a weekly basis. This data is put out
[Guest]: not in any convenient form. It's usually in some PDF file that is located somewhere else. So
[Guest]: that's again an irritant that data is not made available even when it is collected. It's not
[Guest]: made available in a form that is useful. Someone has to then transcribe it literally from one
[Guest]: spreadsheet to another spreadsheet, from a PDF document to something. So one irritant is just
[Guest]: this conversion of data from the way it is collected to the way it can be used. The other
[Guest]: problem, of course, is just a collection of data. There is data that we don't collect. There are
[Guest]: districts that are not surveyed well enough and not carefully. Forget about issues of people making
[Guest]: up data and so on. I'm not even concerned about that at this point. And with COVID, of course,
[Guest]: everything has gone completely crazy because we're not testing enough. They're not reporting
[Guest]: deaths correctly, etc. These are problems that are particularly hard to deal with in India because
[Guest]: the scale of the lack of knowledge is truly huge compared to sort of a typical Western
[Guest]: developed democracy. Just to give you an example, if you just look at deaths in India, most people
[Guest]: in India die at home. Even though about 80% of deaths in India are recorded in some way,
[Guest]: only about 20% of that 80% is what is accompanied by what's called a medically certified cause of
[Guest]: death. So we actually know only the reasons for a death in terms of what a doctor might have
[Guest]: scribbled on a form. In 20% of 80% of the Indian population, very roughly speaking, and it's fairly
[Guest]: homogenous across the country. And it depends very much on which district you are, more far-flung,
[Guest]: remote, etc. The less accurate that information might be, whereas in cities, you typically have
[Guest]: good recording of this. That's a very fundamental thing. If you don't know what people are dying of
[Guest]: and how many are dying, you have no way of understanding what, for example, with COVID
[Guest]: currently, what is the background against which I must measure an excess? How much of an excess
[Guest]: are we seeing twice as many people die as would normally have died in a non-COVID year? Is it
[Guest]: five times as more? And that's very crucial to understand the impact on the country. Where are
[Guest]: people dying? How are they dying? Are they dying typically more of respiratory ailments that have
[Guest]: not been classified as COVID because no COVID test was done? We need to put all of this, and this is
[Guest]: a challenge for modelling. It's a challenge for public health more generally, even if you didn't
[Guest]: talk about models. To understand and to make decisions about public health, you need data.
[Guest]: The problem is, of course, that there is an incentive, there's a subtle incentive to not
[Guest]: report it because you might think it reflects badly upon your district, badly upon your state,
[Guest]: badly upon your chief minister, badly upon your government, etc. So that's going to be an issue
[Guest]: in the future, and it should have been an issue for many years. How do you change the incentives
[Guest]: around so that the incentive to not report bad data, to basically report good data as far as
[Guest]: possible, is there inside the system, that there are checks and balances, there are sniff tests
[Guest]: that you can apply to the data to make sure that they are actually sensible. So we do need, I think
[Guest]: there is slow progress towards this. I think COVID has thrown light on, for many people, the natures
[Guest]: of the inadequacies in the data that we deal with. And hopefully that is one thing that will come
[Guest]: out, the need for transparency of data, the need to make data available, while protecting, of course,
[Guest]: the identities of any individuals who contact disease, etc. But even without that, the level
[Guest]: of granularity with which you understand disease in the United States or the UK or the France or
[Guest]: Germany, we're not nowhere near that. And that's where we should strive to be. So the question that
[Amit Varma]: you just asked, you know, how do we incentivize people to, you know, produce better data and all
[Guest]: that, what are the candidate answers to that? I wish I knew. I really wish I knew what would be
[Guest]: the right way to do that. How do we ensure that people don't feel that they're subject to political
[Guest]: pressure, that they have independence and that they're being monitored, in a sense, to ensure
[Guest]: the data that they provide is good? Part of it is just, you know, giving people a sense of pride in
[Guest]: what they do, in the sense that this will be added up and decisions will be taken on the basis of
[Guest]: the report that is made. But this is something that really calls for more expert knowledge of
[Guest]: health systems. And this is not an area that I'm knowledgeable about. I wouldn't be able to answer
[Amit Varma]: that question well enough. Fair enough. So tell me a little bit more about this latest phase of
[Amit Varma]: your career, as it were the last few years of modeling infectious disease, and so on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've already sort of mentioned what drew you to it. But, you know, tell me about discovering what
[Amit Varma]: the field was like, what were your early challenges? Did people in your fields, you know,
[Amit Varma]: see something like COVID coming? I mean, of course, a law of truly large numbers states that at some
[Amit Varma]: point, there will be a pandemic like this, and so on. That's inevitable. But did it take you
[Amit Varma]: completely by surprise? Or, you know, was it on the cards? Give me a sense of what the last few
[Guest]: years in this field have been like for you. So I moved to Sonipat about six months before the
[Guest]: pandemic actually began four or five months, with the intention of potentially setting up a group of
[Guest]: people interested in disease modeling. And to you make a sort of node, identify people across the
[Guest]: country who would be interested in contributing to improving disease and public health model in
[Guest]: the country. That's what I was here. Of course, I will join the physics and biology department. So
[Guest]: as that as I had regular teaching responsibilities, their research responsibilities,
[Guest]: students to supervise, etc, etc. But this was my larger goal. So it came as a shock almost,
[Guest]: or a surprise to realize that the world had changed sometime around January, about four,
[Guest]: five months after I'd come to Delhi. And that there was this new sort of pathogen around
[Guest]: that everyone was suddenly taking much more seriously that could be potentially the seed
[Guest]: of a pandemic that could sweep across the world. So I think I must have given one of the first
[Guest]: public talks on COVID-19. Remember that the first case in India was on the 30th of January.
[Guest]: On the 7th or 8th of February, I gave a talk in, I think, Hyderabad to a public audience saying
[Guest]: that, look, this is what we know about the virus at this point. This is what we know about how it
[Guest]: spreads. These are the largest socio-political historical backgrounds. What do we know
[Guest]: historically about pandemics of infectious diseases? What might this mean long term?
[Guest]: If China's locked down, what does it mean to supply chains? What is the use of language?
[Guest]: Why is it that, you know, you move from calling it the Wuhan virus? At that point,
[Guest]: at that point, the WHO had not even declared it to be a pandemic. So even though in my title,
[Guest]: I gave the COVID-19 pandemic, I was sort of very conflicted about that and said, you know,
[Guest]: should I say this? They haven't called it a pandemic. We don't know what it is yet, etc.
[Guest]: And after that, I was reading up very intensively about it, following developments in Hong Kong,
[Guest]: Singapore, China, etc., watching it spread first from there to Italy, watching the start of the
[Guest]: Italian pandemic, first couple of cases in India, and also talking about it because I found that
[Guest]: people did want to know and the sort of perspective that I had, which wasn't just a
[Guest]: modeling perspective, but I'm presenting it in a historical context, telling you about the many
[Guest]: areas in which, and I used to say then and I still do now, that there is no area as interdisciplinary
[Guest]: as a study of infectious diseases. It deals with health, it deals with biology, deals with modeling,
[Guest]: it deals with economics, it deals with geopolitics as well. Even if you forget about the whole field
[Guest]: of medicine and public health and all of these other areas. So it's that that I wanted to convey
[Guest]: to people. You should think about this in much larger terms of how it's going to affect your
[Guest]: life, how is it going to affect the lives of other people around you. So that's when we began to
[Guest]: model and very early on, colleagues from the organization that I had taken leave from in
[Guest]: order to come to Ashoka University, which is the Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
[Guest]: we had started a group there along with a bunch of colleagues from across India
[Guest]: called the Indian Scientist Response to COVID-19. And this was really intended to give a scientific
[Guest]: explanations to the public to try and describe to the public in lay terms what the science was
[Guest]: saying, what are the right precautions that you should take, what do we know about the disease,
[Guest]: and to translate it into multiple languages because we didn't want to just be in English
[Guest]: dominated. How do you design good graphics that could describe to people who may not even
[Guest]: read to what the situation was. So we did that very successfully for, we continue to do it now,
[Guest]: curating and producing local language material that describes everything about vaccines for COVID
[Guest]: and current knowledge of COVID, how COVID spreads, hand washing, etc. But part of that was also
[Guest]: setting up a group that did models. So that's when we began working, a group of about eight or nine
[Guest]: of us came together to try and think what were models for COVID-19 that were being discussed at
[Guest]: that time, how would we put that into mathematical framework, and what would we want to do. So this
[Guest]: was a period of intense discussions surrounding that model, where we tried to put it together.
[Guest]: And at that point, many people around India were also involved in COVID modeling, all of sort of
[Guest]: varying qualities. There was some good and some bad, but we were particularly, we wanted to develop
[Guest]: a model that would be general enough and powerful enough to be able to answer the sort of granular
[Guest]: questions that we wanted to answer. In this particular district, with this population,
[Guest]: with so many cases by the beginning of March, what would you predict for what might happen in
[Guest]: the future? If there was a lockdown, what would you predict? What is the best way to come out of
[Guest]: a lockdown? What about lockdowns that are on and off? So you have a lockdown for a week, then we
[Guest]: are off for a week, then on for a week. Is this a way of getting people back to work? Can you segment
[Guest]: the population so that one third of the people go to work, two thirds remain at home, and every week
[Guest]: they interchange? These are all ideas that we were asked to, in some cases we were asked by
[Guest]: government to look at these and to try and suggest different ways out of the lockdown that existed at
[Guest]: that point. And these others were sort of general interest. What was the international scientific
[Guest]: community thinking about lockdowns in general and how does one cope with that? And could we track
[Guest]: the behavior of COVID-19 across Indian cities, across India as a whole, as it developed between
[Guest]: the months of about March when the lockdown happened to much later in the year? So that's
[Guest]: really what we were engaged in. That's where my first intersection with COVID-19 modeling came
[Amit Varma]: about. I'll tell you a little bit more, but we can go on. So my sort of assumption about pandemics
[Amit Varma]: would be that there is a point early in a pandemic, in fact, before a pandemic is called a
[Amit Varma]: pandemic, as you put it, where you don't really know which way it's going to go. You're thinking
[Amit Varma]: probabilistically, and it could be a pandemic or it may not be a pandemic, like in the bird flu
[Amit Varma]: case where, you know, Neil Ferguson forecasts 200 million deaths and 300 people died. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it goes one way instead of the other way. So at what point does it begin to become
[Amit Varma]: apparent that this is a big deal? And also a dual question that would that then have something to do
[Amit Varma]: with the nature of the virus itself? In the sense that is this like a game theory optimal virus
[Amit Varma]: in that it is a perfect mix of infectious and lethal? You know, unlike Ebola, it is not so
[Amit Varma]: lethal that it is not infectious enough. And unlike a lot of common flus or whatever, it is
[Amit Varma]: not incredibly infectious, but not lethal at all. So why worry about it? Did this kind of hit the
[Amit Varma]: sweet spot? Is there a sweet spot? What is your sense of this? And would tracking this have helped
[Amit Varma]: you realize earlier and kind of change the probabilities that yes, this is a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: This is going to be serious. At what point did you realize that, oh, shit, this is something?
[Guest]: Oh, that's a great question. And so just to go back to the sort of previous point that you made,
[Guest]: it really hits a sweet spot because it's highly transmissible. It goes by respiratory. So all you
[Guest]: do have to is to breathe in the same air that someone close to you is breathing out. And then
[Guest]: if enough virus particles get into your body and multiply, then you have COVID-19. But as you
[Guest]: pointed out, the other thing is that most people who have COVID-19 will not know it because we
[Guest]: know that somewhere between 50 to 80% of people who contact COVID-19 are asymptomatic for the
[Guest]: disease. They may feel mildly ill for a few hours, maybe a day or two. Sometimes in many cases,
[Guest]: not that at all. They don't know that they have the disease and are capable of transmitting it
[Guest]: to other people. It's only a small fraction that has symptoms and of them even a smaller
[Guest]: fraction will wind up in an ICU or wind up in a morgue at the end of that. So the combination
[Guest]: of highly transmissible yet killing people at just the right rate is a sort of unique combination
[Guest]: there. And this is really, you know, it's a perfect example of what a highly evolved
[Guest]: pathogen ought to be like. If you really wanted to design one that would seep across the world,
[Guest]: you'd design something like this, where much of the transmission happens before people show
[Guest]: symptoms. Unlike its relative, which is the original SARS virus, which is closely related,
[Guest]: they're both coronaviruses which are related to each other, that killed you at a much larger rate.
[Guest]: It killed you at an infection fatality rate of about 8%. So 8 out of every 100 people who
[Guest]: contacted it would die of it. Another coronavirus is called MERS. MERS, the numbers are more even
[Guest]: more scary. It's about 30%. So you had a 30% chance of dying if you contracted it. None of
[Guest]: these diseases, do we have a vaccine, do we have any sort of treatment, any antiviral, nothing.
[Guest]: So effectively, you catch it, your odds really depend upon that particular number. Whereas we
[Guest]: know now that for the SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, that number is probably somewhere
[Guest]: around 0.1 to 0.3% compared to 8% and compared to 30%. So it's really, you know, it sort of,
[Guest]: it kills you, but it kills you at a sufficiently small rate that you're constantly having to
[Guest]: understand this trade-off in your head. At what point should I open up? How many numbers will die
[Guest]: as a consequence? We're a younger population, maybe we won't die so much. But then you have
[Guest]: to compare that with the fact that people who die are people who belong to our population.
[Guest]: There's somebody's nephew, somebody's uncle, somebody's aunt. And at the individual level,
[Guest]: it's always going to be a tragic issue. So this was debated much more earlier,
[Guest]: when what these numbers were, weren't completely clearly understood. People thought it was much
[Guest]: more like the regular flu. And the argument was, if it's a flu, then everybody gets the flu sooner
[Guest]: or later in a year. Maybe if you're elderly, etc., somebody dies of it, but that's the risk
[Guest]: that we're willing to take. But then it took some while to figure out that this is not the flu.
[Guest]: That, you know, it's certainly not the flu. The older you get, the further and further it gets
[Guest]: away from being a flu. The younger you get, you should, it's kind of a little more flu-like,
[Guest]: but nevertheless it has long-term consequences that the flu doesn't have. But this has all been
[Guest]: an evolving understanding, and that's a very nice point that you've made. The fact that this is
[Guest]: really hits a sweet spot in terms of its behavior as a potential pathogen that influences human
[Guest]: beings. When did I first think about the importance of this? It took a long time for me to really
[Guest]: figure out because the numbers themselves weren't clear. The distinction between a case fatality
[Guest]: ratio, the infection fatality ratio, the fact that many, such a substantial fraction of people were
[Guest]: asymptomatic for the disease, the fact that age, the way age is distributed in the population makes
[Guest]: a huge difference. India is a young population. Italy is an old population. So, it hits both of
[Guest]: us very, very differently. All of these things I sort of slowly began to realize as I went forward,
[Amit Varma]: and so it's a learning experience for me as well. And, you know, when you reach that intersection
[Amit Varma]: of modeling how an infectious disease will spread and modeling what the consequences of, say, a
[Amit Varma]: public policy which is intended to counter that, it gets complicated. Like the issue with something
[Amit Varma]: like a lockdown is that sure, it is possible to, you know, with the best data that you have to
[Amit Varma]: come to some kind of a probabilistic estimate of if we do a lockdown, we'll save these many
[Amit Varma]: lives, a curve will flatten in this way, maybe it will be prolonged, all of that. What is much
[Amit Varma]: harder to model are the downstream economic impacts. For example, what is going to be the
[Amit Varma]: effect on migrant labor, if we lose 20% of GDP because of the lockdown, that is also going to
[Amit Varma]: kill a lot of people. And the problem with any public policy measure, in this particular case,
[Amit Varma]: is really a case of the seen and the unseen, in the sense that the bad consequences of people who
[Amit Varma]: died at a scene, and the people you are saving, that is unseen. Therefore, you know, as far as
[Amit Varma]: any measure is concerned, whether you do a lockdown, you don't do a lockdown, you do,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a lockdown and gradations, it's something that if you can ever tell whether it was a wise
[Amit Varma]: move or not, it is only well, well, well, in hindsight, at the moment, you're in the fog of
[Amit Varma]: war, there's simply no information. So as a modeler, there's this extra dimension that you're
[Amit Varma]: suddenly having to deal with. And you're having to deal with, say, the incentives, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: of politicians, which can go in different directions, like one, of course, will be the
[Amit Varma]: status quo bias that rather than do something which harms people, I'd rather just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not do anything and pass the buck and control the narrative. Tell me about this challenge,
[Guest]: like, how does one deal with this? So this is a challenge. And exactly,
[Guest]: you've really explained it very beautifully. And this is unfortunately not an area that I've got
[Guest]: into yet. How do I combine epidemiological models for what might happen with, together with economic
[Guest]: models that examine the consequences of particular actions, such as a lockdown, etc. This is much
[Guest]: harder to do. We now are working on a bunch of models that hopefully will provide one way of
[Guest]: thinking about this question. These are called agent-based models, where you try to model every
[Guest]: individual in, say, the Pune city, or the greater Mumbai area, or sort of the NCR region, etc,
[Guest]: or even potentially across the whole state or the whole country. And then you say,
[Guest]: the first thing I'm going to do is to make a synthetic population for that region.
[Guest]: Instead of, you know, if I knew every detail about everybody, I could just sort of write
[Guest]: person in one line, so and so, you know, Harkirat Singh, age 65, this comorbidity,
[Guest]: earning agricultural labor, etc, etc, etc. But what I have to do is to make a population that
[Guest]: is a synthetic population, a made-up computer population that has all the features of the
[Guest]: population that I want to study in rural Punjab, or in Bhatinda, or in Kerala, or wherever it is.
[Guest]: And then these models are big computational models that try and put in elements of how
[Guest]: people make decisions about that. Where do they make trade-offs between economics and health?
[Guest]: Where do you account for people who are vaccine hesitant? Some fraction of the population is
[Guest]: vaccine hesitant. Can I put that in and simulate what might happen in this case? So I have people
[Guest]: who go to work and come back, go to work and come back on a regular schedule, kids go to school,
[Guest]: and then I introduce the disease in that population. And this disease begins to spread,
[Guest]: and people see the numbers of that disease and then begin to alter their own decisions accordingly.
[Guest]: So you have infections that rise and come down, you can have vaccinations, you can have different
[Guest]: variants. All of this you can test out on your computational population. These models have
[Guest]: earlier been used to study really how disease spreads in a population that is somewhat
[Guest]: semi-realistic. But now you can also use them to understand economic decisions. You can hard-code
[Guest]: these in the way you describe these, how people make decisions on the basis of the economy.
[Guest]: And then from that I try to extract the information that you talked about. All of this is a
[Guest]: pipe dream, it's in the future. But we made some steps towards that, we're actually defining many
[Guest]: of these units that go into this. And that I think is going to be the most important thing
[Guest]: that we're going to be doing in the next couple of years. And you know, your point is completely
[Guest]: valid. And again, it goes back to what I said about this being the most interdisciplinary
[Guest]: area that I could possibly think of. It has any public policy must include all of this.
[Guest]: The facts about the disease, how it spreads, people's circumstances, poverty, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Loss of livelihood, together with country level economic, macroeconomic consequences for the
[Guest]: ability of the Indian state to create jobs when its budget is already depleted by the strains of
[Amit Varma]: coping with the pandemic for a year, year and a half. Fantastic. All my listeners would be expert
[Amit Varma]: forecasters in at least one area by now, which is knowing when a commercial break comes up that as
[Amit Varma]: we pass an hour, the probability of a commercial break keeps rising and we have finally got there.
[Amit Varma]: So let's take a quick break. And when we come back, let's dive a little deeper into COVID-19.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of
[Amit Varma]: me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat
[Amit Varma]: popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I was shaped by it in many
[Amit Varma]: ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things. Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it. Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started
[Amit Varma]: the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches
[Amit Varma]: my fancy. I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up,
[Amit Varma]: each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Gautam Menon about his work on
[Amit Varma]: physics, biology, modeling and COVID-19. So tell me a little bit about how our understanding of
[Amit Varma]: this particular virus began to evolve through the early months of last year. In particular,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when we look back on history with hindsight, even if it's recent history as
[Amit Varma]: recent as a few months ago, you know, the pictures that we somehow paint in our minds tend to be very
[Amit Varma]: clear pictures. But actually, you know, in the moment, there's much more hesitation and uncertainty
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. So give me a picture of your personal sort of journey in understanding the
[Amit Varma]: virus and understanding the pandemic and figuring out what's happening, how serious it is, all of
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, while you're, of course, doing the modeling work, how are those models kind of
[Guest]: evolving? Give me a picture of, you know, that period. So I think the first and the most important
[Guest]: thing that I had to learn was the difference between a case fatality ratio and infection
[Guest]: fatality ratio. And case fatality is, you know, the number of people who die divided by the number
[Guest]: of cases of confirmed COVID-19 that you get. The infection fatality ratio is the number of people
[Guest]: who die divided by the number of people infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus. And normally these
[Guest]: numbers are sort of close to each other. But the main step in certainly my understanding was
[Guest]: understanding that these two numbers could be very different from each other because of the large
[Guest]: reservoir of people who would show no symptoms of the disease, were asymptomatic. So they would have
[Guest]: to be counted among the infected. But out of that much larger number, only a small number would be
[Guest]: counted as cases because they actually showed symptoms or landed up for testing, etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And this, of course, the distinction is also a function of how much you test. If you could test
[Guest]: everybody, then you would catch every case and catch every infection. You will wind up invariably
[Guest]: missing some fraction of these. And exactly the extent to which you're missing cases is an
[Guest]: important question right now. The models that people began to write down, I think, fairly early
[Guest]: on, not too early, but maybe about a month and a half, two months into the epidemic, people realised
[Guest]: that you had to account for these asymptomatic cases and that they were important in the sense
[Guest]: that they could infect other people with showing infections, showing symptoms themselves. And the
[Guest]: other point was that even for the people who were going to show symptoms earlier, they were most
[Guest]: infectious before they began to show these symptoms. And that's again something unusual
[Guest]: about this disease, that it has a longish period of a day and two days, maybe more,
[Guest]: in which you can be infectious to other people while not knowing that you actually had the
[Guest]: disease. So then people began to develop a whole bunch of models that included this particular
[Guest]: feature. It included the fact that, you know, some fraction of people would go to hospital,
[Guest]: some of them would die, and began to flesh these with numbers. What is the probability
[Guest]: that if you were in ICU, then you would die? What is the probability of being in an ICU if
[Guest]: you were hospitalised for some case of COVID? What fraction were mild cases as opposed to severe
[Guest]: cases? And then it began to be even fleshed out even more. If you were between the ages of 80 and
[Guest]: 90, what is the probability that you would be a severe case, who would then die or require
[Guest]: ventilation of some sort, etc. So this age stratification, as it's called, solely began
[Guest]: to be understood that this is an important feature of how we think about the disease and how we might
[Guest]: understand the numbers that might ensue if you allow this to sweep through a population,
[Guest]: or even if you impose some sort of a constraint, such as a lockdown, how would these numbers
[Guest]: change? And that was very important because it's a very differential way in which people of
[Guest]: different age groups are affected. So once we had all of that in place, I'm guessing this is about
[Guest]: three to four months, maybe five months into the pandemic, then the question was, is India different
[Guest]: in any way? And this has haunted people modeling for quite a bit. It seemed as though, in fact,
[Guest]: if you just look at the numbers, fewer Indians are dying than people elsewhere. If you look at
[Guest]: the deaths per million population, let's say, then the Indian number is at least about a factor of 10
[Guest]: to 15 smaller than the analogous number for the UK or for the US. Let's say that we can understand
[Guest]: the UK and the US are older populations. Why is that number so different from Brazil?
[Guest]: And sort of nominally, you would have thought that India and Brazil are not that different.
[Guest]: We're all sort of growing LMIC, roughly speaking, economies. Why is it that Brazil is seeing such a
[Guest]: large number of deaths, whereas India is not? Now, we realize that this question is sort of holds
[Guest]: many questions inside it. Are we counting deaths correctly? And Brazil sort of records all of its
[Guest]: deaths and has a cause of death. India, as I pointed out, doesn't do that. Are we missing
[Guest]: deaths outside the major cities? In the major cities, you could say that maybe you're counting
[Guest]: all of the deaths more or less accurately, but is the real bulk of deaths happening outside?
[Guest]: So then you can go back and ask these numbers in a more specific, district-specific, city-specific,
[Guest]: city-area-specific, to see what you're actually missing out. Then this question of, you know,
[Guest]: the fact that the ages, how sensitive is this to the way you distribute people across the ages?
[Guest]: How sensitive it is to the structure of families? India has multi-generational families where both
[Guest]: young children as well as elderly grandparents live in the same house, and that certainly affects
[Guest]: transmission. We are a society that tends to protect elderly people in whatever way we can.
[Guest]: So there is automatically, at the coming of the virus, there is some level of distancing. Once
[Guest]: you know that old people and people with comorbidities are likely to be more affected,
[Guest]: then families have automatically reconfigured wherever they could to be able to protect older
[Guest]: people. Of course, also in India, there's also survivorship in the sense that if you've already
[Guest]: lived up to 70, the likelihood is that your nutrition was better, that your educational
[Guest]: status was better, that you come from a higher socioeconomic class, etc. So that's something that
[Guest]: again goes into this description. You have to try and disentangle it from this whole mass of data
[Guest]: that actually exists. So slowly we began to get a better understanding. The only real question being,
[Guest]: was there anything special about the Indian population that protected it? And this is
[Guest]: something that has really bugged many people in this field, including very, very good Indian
[Guest]: scientists who pointed out that, you know, according to their view of things, something
[Guest]: does protect the Indian population. And this is likely to be the fact that Indians, on average,
[Guest]: grew up in more unhygienic and unhealthy surroundings than people elsewhere, let's say
[Guest]: in Japan or France or Germany, etc. This exposure to a variety of pathogens when you grew up in your
[Guest]: childhood, etc., makes your immune system respond a little less, a little more bluntly to things
[Guest]: that are challenging it. We know that many of the bad consequences of COVID-19 really come from an
[Guest]: excessive immune response. The immune response is overreacting to the presence of this new invader
[Guest]: inside your body. So if you can stamp that down, if you can prevent inflammation at that level,
[Guest]: steroids, for example, do that, that's one way of coping with the disease. But maybe it's inbuilt
[Guest]: in India, the fact that we sort of grew up, so we have this whole exposure wherever we go, we don't
[Guest]: really truly insulate ourselves from our environment. That was something that people did to a
[Guest]: very exhaustive statistical study suggest. Now it seems that those arguments were just plain wrong
[Guest]: because from an immunological point of view, there's no real reason to believe that for this
[Guest]: particular viral disease, a prior exposure made a difference, but it's a valid scientific point
[Guest]: of view to take. Just now, unfortunately, seems to be wrong because it's very, very steep rise now
[Guest]: that we're seeing. Had we been protected, we would not have seen it. So it's clear that that argument
[Guest]: was wrong, but it's a legitimate scientific argument that many of us considered at some
[Amit Varma]: point over the last year. So many, many strands to pursue here and the first one is this, that it
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that when we try to arrive at the truth about this virus, there are sort of two
[Amit Varma]: paths that we can take which both make sense and which at some point will come together to do a
[Amit Varma]: whole picture. One is we look at what the numbers tell us, how is it spreading, where is it spreading,
[Amit Varma]: what is it doing? And the other is we look at the inherent biology of the virus itself where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we encode the genome and blah, blah, blah. And we look at that. Another way of putting
[Amit Varma]: it would be that you look at what it does and you also look at what it is and why it is what it is,
[Amit Varma]: which I guess are questions of physics as well. Then, you know, just taking this analogy further,
[Amit Varma]: for example, one of the big learning moments for me a couple of years ago about artificial
[Amit Varma]: intelligence was, you know, when AlphaZero did what it did, it destroyed Stockfish in chess.
[Amit Varma]: And Stockfish was, of course, the older sort of engine, which at a rating of about 3500 was way
[Amit Varma]: stronger than the strongest human, Magnus Carlsen. But this new machine learning program called
[Amit Varma]: AlphaZero just came, learnt, taught itself to play chess in 24 hours and destroyed Stockfish.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the great learnings there was you didn't know how it did it. You just know that
[Amit Varma]: it did it. You saw what it did, but you didn't know the why. You didn't know the inherent logic
[Amit Varma]: behind it. And which is true of a lot of machine learning that you don't get the inherent logic,
[Amit Varma]: but you know that it's figuring out some remarkable truths. So therefore, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in this aspect of figuring out what it does, figuring out what the numbers tell you,
[Amit Varma]: is there a point at which machine learning also becomes applicable in terms of figuring out what
[Amit Varma]: it is? And do these two ways of learning about a virus converge at some point? Or do they go in
[Amit Varma]: different directions? And I imagine that in the early days, when the biology is still kind of
[Amit Varma]: figuring itself out, though, even there, I mean, it's it's a freaking miracle that all these
[Amit Varma]: vaccines came that the mRNA vaccines were practically designed on a computer in January
[Amit Varma]: itself, which is mind boggling progress there. But in terms of the numbers, like,
[Guest]: what are your thoughts on these? People have applied machine learning
[Guest]: to trying to predict the course of the pandemic. And that's something that's a sort of minor
[Guest]: cottage industry in itself. It's a bit difficult to do that with any degree of real credibility.
[Guest]: The reason is that the way these IBM computers, I guess, figured out what the right machine
[Guest]: learning strategy was, was that you just fed it every chess game ever played. And you and then
[Guest]: it basically used that information played against itself multiple times to see what
[Amit Varma]: were optimal choices strategy. Actually, interestingly, sorry to interrupt you.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, with AlphaZero, they didn't do that. They just started the rules of the game.
[Amit Varma]: So earlier computers would have heuristics built in and it would have the entire database of
[Amit Varma]: everything ever played like Stockfish. But AlphaZero approach was you teach it the rules and
[Amit Varma]: then it plays against itself a few million times and figures out its own heuristic,
[Amit Varma]: which you have no access to. It's like a black box.
[Guest]: I agree. Corrected on that. That's the way in which it sort of plays against itself,
[Guest]: figures out what has to be done and then see what is an optimal strategy at the end of it.
[Guest]: But here it's not clear what the rules are. I mean, the rules are profoundly,
[Guest]: the way disease spreads is really at its root a social phenomenon.
[Guest]: And who is talking to, who is interacting with, who in what density, where, at what,
[Guest]: you know, where does the person in the slum intersect the person of the in the high-rise
[Guest]: building? What are the points of this intersection? What are the nature of that interaction?
[Guest]: Who's wearing a mask? Who's not wearing a mask? Because the complexities are social and not
[Guest]: biological or physical. This becomes a far, far harder problem. So I don't think there's
[Guest]: been any approaches to disease modeling that actually take the more modern approach of this
[Guest]: adversarial network approach that you mentioned. It's more based on traditional studies of how
[Guest]: disease transmission has happened, records across multiple countries, records across multiple
[Guest]: districts and try to understand is there a logic behind that. But here it's as though you're playing
[Guest]: chess with where you're not told that the, you know, you're, there's sort of fuzziness around
[Guest]: the position of every chess piece. It could be somewhere in this region, but you're not sure where.
[Guest]: And whether given that fuzziness, there is useful information to be had that in terms of being able
[Guest]: to project forward is not very clear to me. I don't have any neural network or AI-based or
[Guest]: machine learning-based algorithm that actually manages to do that in any credible way.
[Guest]: And also the other point is that, as you said, these are not interpretable or explainable.
[Guest]: You don't know why it does. It just sort of says it'll go up here and then it'll come down a little
[Guest]: later. But you have to be careful. It's not being biased by the data that you fed it in earlier,
[Guest]: which showed lots of stuff that went down for reasons that may have been completely
[Guest]: different from reasons that prevail in the current situation. So the models that I work with and the
[Guest]: models that I sort of, I like to use are a bunch of different classes of model, but they all rely
[Guest]: on a very classic description by two Scottish mathematicians called Kermack and McKendrick.
[Guest]: And they devised a model called the SIR model. And that model and the way of thinking about it
[Guest]: is at the basis of all research in infectious diseases nowadays. It's really remarkable to
[Guest]: see what a profound impact that has had. And the idea is that the simplest way to think about
[Guest]: disease is just put everybody in the population into three boxes or compartments. You're either
[Guest]: susceptible to the disease, you're infected by the disease and infectious to other people,
[Guest]: or you're recovered from the disease. And you can sort of choose different versions of these
[Guest]: that are put in more compartments. But the idea is everybody in the population you can put into
[Guest]: these boxes. Then understanding how the numbers of infected change is just as simply a question
[Guest]: of saying once a susceptible person contacts an infectious person, they move from the susceptible
[Guest]: to the infected box. Once they recover, they move from the infected box to the recovered box.
[Guest]: So it's just movement across these boxes or compartments that is described by this mathematical
[Guest]: model. And the twist here is that you need susceptible people to interact with infected
[Guest]: people for the susceptible person to be infected. If there was no infected person at all surrounding
[Guest]: you, you would remain susceptible for an infinite amount of time, for as long as it takes.
[Guest]: So these are simple ideas that say that we can forget about people's names, ages, colors,
[Guest]: whatever, etc. For the purpose of disease, all we need to understand are these compartments.
[Guest]: And there is no simpler version of this model. There are more complicated versions,
[Guest]: but no simpler versions. And people have worked with these models. These models were roughly
[Guest]: about 100 years old now, and there have been many sort of versions of higher order versions
[Guest]: of these models that have a lot of complexity. Let me give you one example because it's an
[Guest]: interesting example. So you can have a susceptible, infected, recovered, dead, removed, etc. All of
[Guest]: these categories. The dead category is an interesting one because if you think about Ebola,
[Guest]: we understood that even dead Ebola patients can be infectious. And the way you handle the body
[Guest]: in a traditional African burial is one that allows the dead person to transfer the Ebola,
[Guest]: the live Ebola virus to you through a body fluid. So changes in burial practices is really a
[Guest]: consequence of really superb epidemiological thinking about this problem. And in order to do
[Guest]: that, you have to make a little compartment for the dead compartment, which could potentially
[Guest]: infect someone who was susceptible if you didn't sort of tap that down and make sure that that
[Guest]: didn't happen. So you have, depending upon the disease, you can devise the compartments
[Guest]: appropriately. And now there are compartmental models for COVID-19, which are fairly good.
[Guest]: And they really put in the sort of information that you need to understand how the disease is
[Guest]: going to spread at a large scale. What will the peak be? What will a lockdown do? What will multiple
[Guest]: lockdowns do, etc. The main intuition that you get, you have is the first port of call is that
[Guest]: particular model or the version of that model that's most appropriate to your disease. So I
[Guest]: think it's a very beautiful and a powerful way of thinking about it in a sense. And it's
[Guest]: interesting that that intuition, the fundamental intuition of these two guys worked out so many
[Guest]: years ago is really what we rely on when we think about modeling. You know, you mentioned the change
[Amit Varma]: in burial practices because of Ebola. And that reminds me of, you know, just a stray bit of
[Amit Varma]: trivia I'll throw out there, which was in fact in the preview episode of the Seen and the Unseen,
[Amit Varma]: when it started more than four years ago, which is how the Parsis changed their burial practices,
[Amit Varma]: like the Parsis of Mumbai used to leave bodies for, you know, vultures. And the reason that
[Amit Varma]: stopped is that in the early 1990s, when cows started getting a certain kind of stomachache
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, vets would prescribe something called Diclofenac. So the cows would take Diclofenac and
[Amit Varma]: then later the dead cows would be eaten by vultures. And because of the Diclofenac in the
[Amit Varma]: dead cows, the vultures above Mumbai or wherever in the area started getting liver disease and
[Amit Varma]: started dying out. And because there weren't enough vultures, the Parsis had to move away from
[Amit Varma]: leaving the bodies in the tower of silence for vultures because there simply were no vultures.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, we're talking about real vultures here, not human ones. Otherwise,
[Guest]: there's no shortage of those. It's a particularly lovely story because it's the intersection of
[Guest]: culture, you know, culture and traditional practices with some with, you know, with veterinary
[Guest]: health and in a sort of strange and complicated ways. It's really a lovely example. Classic
[Amit Varma]: example of the Seen and the Unseen. Who would have thunk? Cow gets a stomachache and Parsis
[Amit Varma]: change burial practices. It's insane. You know, as all this is happening, you are tracing how
[Amit Varma]: the disease is doing whatever it is doing in the population. And there are all these social elements
[Amit Varma]: and interaction and you're figuring out the virus. But as you're figuring out all of this,
[Amit Varma]: the virus is also evolving, right? And my earlier understanding, which might be a simplistic one,
[Amit Varma]: so maybe now you can correct me and elaborate on that. My earlier understanding was that a virus
[Amit Varma]: will typically evolve in a way that makes it more infectious and less lethal. Like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: earlier flu viruses like some of the flus which caused the pandemics of the past evolved to
[Amit Varma]: becoming completely harmless and seasonal variants. Similarly, you know, I think one of the
[Amit Varma]: two coronavirus variants which causes a kind of flu completely harmless again was Anirban Mahapatra
[Amit Varma]: was telling me in the episode I did with him caused something a couple of centuries ago.
[Amit Varma]: So one would have imagined that okay, this virus will go in that way in the sense it will become
[Amit Varma]: more infectious and less lethal. And over a period of time, it'll be a seasonal thing and we'll just
[Amit Varma]: get COVID and it's fine. We'll, you know, we'll get over after two or three days of not feeling well.
[Amit Varma]: Now one, how hard is it to model something like this when all these variants are springing up?
[Amit Varma]: And to the variant that seems to have struck in the second wave, I mean, a lot of the deaths in
[Amit Varma]: the second wave in India are really because of the failure of the dysfunctional state,
[Amit Varma]: the scarcity of oxygen and many of those lives could no doubt have been saved. But at the same
[Amit Varma]: time, while it does seem to have become far more infectious, we are not sure yet whether it is
[Amit Varma]: less lethal. People are dying all over the place because of it. Like I, you know, I find that I
[Amit Varma]: don't have a single friend who's unaffected by it in some way or the other in terms of family or
[Amit Varma]: friends or, you know, extended circles. So what is your take on what's going on here?
[Guest]: So you have to draw a distinction between evolutionary timescales and the sort of
[Guest]: shorter timescales on which we are observing the behavior of the virus. It's true that the ultimate
[Guest]: job of every living entity on earth is to be able to propagate itself and to find the smoothest way
[Guest]: of doing it and to prevent itself from being sort of, you know, from that chain of propagation
[Guest]: being stopped. Coupled with the idea of natural selection that whatever enables you to fit better
[Guest]: into this certain niche into which you are born as an organism is one that will enable you to
[Guest]: propagate better, give rise to more progeny which will then expand further. This is complicated by
[Guest]: several things. First of all, viruses mutate at random. The virus doesn't know what's a good
[Guest]: mutation, what's a bad mutation. Some things might be, it might kill the host immediately,
[Guest]: some things might let the host survive, something might be so minor the host won't notice it at all.
[Guest]: It's only over a much longer timescale that you can allow for the selection, that you slowly prune
[Guest]: out those that will tend to be dead ends in terms of dying out, they kill the host too fast so they
[Guest]: can't propagate versus those who manage to survive within the community for a longer time.
[Guest]: Already there's an interesting selection that's happening here. Already you can argue that with
[Guest]: masking, with physical distancing etc. you're selecting for those viruses that pass more
[Guest]: easily between people. That's an interesting point of view from an ecological point of view,
[Guest]: that the only ones that survived are the ones that were moved more easily because you already
[Guest]: by fear force people to sort of stay further away from each other. Right now I think it hasn't been
[Guest]: enough time for these ecological scales to play out, for things to, for the virus, the virulence
[Guest]: of the virus to decrease sufficiently so that it becomes like a cold, which may or may not be
[Guest]: the final trajectory that it actually chooses to take because who knows what it's trying to
[Guest]: optimize in this particular case. It could jump hosts for example, if it found a different animal
[Guest]: host in which it was perfectly happy, it might move back to that host and that would be a different
[Guest]: evolutionary trajectory that it might choose. Regarding this question of, you know, we all
[Guest]: know people who've been affected by COVID in this way compared to the previous wave and so the
[Guest]: assumption here is that it's worse this time compared to what it was earlier, but all of
[Guest]: this is still really anecdotal. We don't know whether at the level of numbers, this is just
[Guest]: the same old virus in effective terms as it was earlier. It's just that because every number is
[Guest]: being multiplied by a factor of 10, all the people in the 10 to 20 age group, 20 to 30 age group,
[Guest]: 30 to 40 age group, because all of that is being multiplied by 10, we're seeing the adverse
[Guest]: consequences, the larger numbers of people dying, even though the fraction of people dying may be
[Guest]: the same as in the earlier case. So right now there isn't enough data to tell whether this
[Guest]: is more virulent. So it's just currently this is completely anecdotal. Hopefully, you know,
[Guest]: sort of going forward, looking back, which is always the best way to see these things,
[Guest]: you'll be able to understand this question a little better.
[Amit Varma]: Also, when you're modeling, can you look into the past? You know, is there a natural curve
[Amit Varma]: to pandemics? For example, I'd done an episode with Chinmay Tumbe on past pandemics, and we've
[Amit Varma]: been plagued with pandemics as it were for a while. But nevertheless, if you just count the
[Amit Varma]: number of pandemics humanity has had, the sample size is really small. Can one generalize from that
[Amit Varma]: in what a pandemic will necessarily do? Can one figure out that this is a natural curve? Can one
[Amit Varma]: then say that this intervention, like say, intervention X, which is lockdown or intervention
[Amit Varma]: Y, which is no lockdown, will have this effect on the curve and therefore we should do this?
[Guest]: What's the state of thinking on this? So the answer is that the original SIR
[Guest]: model of Carmack and McKendrick was actually applied retrospectively to plague data in Bombay
[Guest]: from the 1905 to 1906 pandemic. And so that's when they found that they could perfectly fit
[Guest]: the rise in the fall in cases over a 30-week period using their mathematical model. And that
[Guest]: gave them certain confidence that this should apply more generally to pandemics. So this has
[Guest]: been used to model data earlier as well as pretty much anything, any sort of current increase and
[Guest]: decrease in cases, in the case of infectious disease. So we're confident enough that the
[Guest]: elements, the mathematical elements that are there actually work. You can use, you can impose
[Guest]: lockdowns, see what the effect of the lockdowns are, etc. Usually what happens is that the lockdown
[Guest]: mainly reduces the number of cases but spreads it out over a longer time. It doesn't sort of,
[Guest]: you know, it doesn't eliminate the cases altogether. But just by spreading it out over
[Guest]: a longer time you remove the sort of pressure that you're seeing right now on hospitals,
[Guest]: on the public health system, and thereby saving lives that would otherwise have been destroyed
[Guest]: because they just weren't able to access medical treatment in time. So we are confident enough
[Guest]: about these models. We know what they do. We can explore a bunch of different interventions in
[Guest]: them. The hard question is asking how does a particular intervention translate into changing
[Guest]: a particular number in the model, a parameter in the model? How does mask wearing by 50%
[Guest]: of the population change that number versus 70%? How does a lockdown change that particular number
[Guest]: from, let's say, from 0.2 to 0.5? These are much more delicate because they're really statements
[Guest]: about how population behave as an aggregate. And as I said, it's driven by social behaviour.
[Guest]: And these are the hardest things. Suppose 10% of people in Bombay decided, look, this is all
[Guest]: hocus-pocus. I'm just going to go out and behave normally as I would. So then the assumptions about
[Guest]: physical distancing applied to the entire population begin to break down. And then you
[Guest]: have to ask, how do I put that into a model? Some fraction of people who just will not obey
[Guest]: any instruction, any reasonable public health instruction that they're given.
[Guest]: What do you do in that context? So this is a grey area of models. How do I take social
[Guest]: public behaviour and convert it into the numbers that must enter my mathematical model? Once I'm
[Guest]: confident of that transition, I can run my mathematical model and say, this is what you
[Guest]: will get at the end of it after lockdown, after imposing mask wearing, after relaxing mask wearing
[Guest]: for so long. And you can begin to think that, look, this may represent the numbers a little better.
[Guest]: And I could keep going back and calibrating against the numbers of cases, numbers of deaths,
[Guest]: numbers of hospitalisation to make sure that you're satisfying the basic smell test for the
[Guest]: validity and the quality of that model. But this back and forth is very, very important to make
[Guest]: sure that you have everything in this mapping that you've done correctly between these things.
[Amit Varma]: So in the process of kind of figuring out what was happening during the first wave, so to say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's so tragic that we're almost speaking of it in the past tense of first wave.
[Amit Varma]: You know what happened in those months of last year? Like we begin in a fog of war, right? You
[Amit Varma]: know certain things, but you don't know so many other things. What are those sort of big TIL
[Amit Varma]: moments about the virus at different points? Like I imagine, for example, once you start looking for
[Amit Varma]: antibodies in the population, you do your cell prevalence surveys and all of that, you understand
[Amit Varma]: the big gap between infection fatality rate and case fatality rate, as you said, that is a TIL
[Amit Varma]: there and more TILs gradually come. And then some TILs might be theories which turn out to be false,
[Amit Varma]: you know, such as why India is not affected so much by the virus. So, you know, what were those
[Amit Varma]: big sort of steps in learning about the virus for you as we went through the months last year?
[Guest]: Certainly, as I said before, the importance of the asymptomatic category was very important,
[Guest]: and then figuring out the numbers and what is the right number for the infection fatality ratio.
[Guest]: You know, we sort of looked through a whole bunch of different literatures and tried to optimize it,
[Guest]: looked at what the numbers are, tried to fit the Indian data with respect to that, and finally
[Guest]: came up with a range that we think is correct. And then we were able to compare to more and more
[Guest]: modern research regarding that's a very important number, because in a sense, that's the most
[Guest]: specific consequence. Someone near you, you know, dies of the particular disease. We won't be able
[Guest]: to estimate that. And from that, how many people will need hospitalization or an ICU,
[Guest]: because some fraction of that will go into, will have to die at the end of it.
[Guest]: I think the basic elements of what should go into the model were clear enough.
[Guest]: They were clear enough by certainly in the first four months of the disease, three to four months
[Guest]: across the world. And beyond that, it didn't change. Maybe people would have tuned a number
[Guest]: here or there, but not all of that much. What changed was the development of other types of
[Guest]: models. For example, the agent-based models that I told you about, about network models,
[Guest]: all of which are intended to answer different types of questions, have different levels of
[Guest]: granularity from the simple compartmental models. So people began to work on those models as much
[Guest]: more detailed versions of these, and they put in aspects of people's behavior that you can in a
[Guest]: network model or an agent-based model that you cannot in the sort of simple model where I'm
[Guest]: trying to take this parameter and tune it there, and to understand what this means.
[Guest]: So this is part of the evolution of thinking about any disease. You start off with a simpler model,
[Guest]: you dress it up as much as you can. But side by side, the whole bunch of different models,
[Guest]: statistical models, prediction models, AI, machine learning, all of these proceed together.
[Guest]: And somewhere at the end of it, you sort of get a better idea of what these models are saying.
[Guest]: So one thing I can point out that if you look at how we ought to have been thinking about modeling
[Guest]: in the country, we should have been looking much more at what is called an ensemble model.
[Guest]: Right now, the Department of Science and Technology funded and supported a model
[Guest]: called this DST supermodel, built by various computer scientists and engineers and one
[Guest]: army medical doctor. But that, it sort of said that this is going to be our model.
[Guest]: That's always a mistake, because no single model is often good enough. Its behavior fluctuates.
[Guest]: But the US, UK, and many other countries used to build an ensemble of models. So they have
[Guest]: 10 people or 20 people in different universities across the country, each of them coming up with
[Guest]: a different model for what's going on. They pool this information together. And between week and
[Guest]: week, they'd find out which is doing better, which is doing worse. They weight those that
[Guest]: are doing better historically somewhat more than the ones who are doing worse. And then they come
[Guest]: up with a combined suggestion from all of these models saying over the next week or 10 days,
[Guest]: this is what's going to happen. This usually is good at eliminating biases that individual
[Guest]: modelers might have. It includes information that some models do better, things that some
[Guest]: models do better versus things that some models do worse. And then you get to a much better
[Guest]: prediction than you would have. It's the wisdom of crowds, in a sense, in this particular context.
[Guest]: But that's how one ought to have done it. That's not how we've done it in India.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the things that you've done, and I heard you mention it in an interview,
[Amit Varma]: is that your model is effectively open source. So anyone can go in there and tweak the assumptions
[Amit Varma]: and put in their own data and just see kind of what it does. So if my listeners want to
[Amit Varma]: kind of play around with it, is there a URL they can go to and sort of have a look at it?
[Guest]: So the model right now is not open source, but the description of the model is open source.
[Guest]: So anyone can use that and so on. What exists is a website on which you can play around with it,
[Guest]: where it is hard-coded. So you can figure out, in Maharashtra state, if I imposed a lockdown
[Guest]: between such and such a time, then what would happen? So this is linked from the website of
[Guest]: the Indian scientists' response to COVID-19. Inside Cog, within that, there's a link that
[Guest]: goes to the modeling group. And that modeling group has a link that goes to the dashboard,
[Guest]: as we call it. So people are willing to do that. On a general point of principle,
[Guest]: we plan to make this public, although the current version of the model, because it's evolved,
[Guest]: become much more technically more complicated, etc. And it's my belief that this should be
[Guest]: completely transparent. So we will make this available publicly to people who want to download
[Guest]: it, play with it or whatever. This will take about a week to 10 days before we do it. Right
[Guest]: now, we're trying to finalize a bunch of papers that have to relate to the work that we've been
[Guest]: doing. Along with that, as we push that out, we push this out as well.
[Amit Varma]: Great. One more question. Now, when we're looking back at what happened last year,
[Amit Varma]: you did the modeling, then you saw what happened, the models kept getting tweaked along the way,
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. What lessons can we learn from the progression of COVID-19 in the first
[Amit Varma]: wave which are applicable to us today? Like, tell me a bit about what the current models say
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, where we are going with this. I mean, obviously, what happened last year is
[Amit Varma]: relevant, even if this variant is different in certain ways. You know, what should we expect?
[Amit Varma]: And did this take everyone by surprise? Were we all kind of blindsided? Because just a couple
[Amit Varma]: of months back, you know, Siddharth Mukherjee had this great piece in the New Yorker about
[Amit Varma]: why has India escaped and what are the possible reasons we haven't got it, which I'll also ask
[Amit Varma]: you about shortly. But just in general, like, were we blindsided? And now that all of this is
[Amit Varma]: unfolding, you know, we had cases go up and then hospitalizations go up and deaths are going up.
[Amit Varma]: You know, of course, our health minister announced that the endgame with COVID had
[Amit Varma]: happened a couple of months back. But what is now sort of the endgame, as it were, where are we
[Guest]: headed? You've asked me multiple questions, I'll have to try and disentangle each one.
[Guest]: I'm so sorry, I tend to do this. That's why it's a three hour show.
[Guest]: I think it's correct to say that most people were blindsided by this. And that's because of the gap
[Guest]: between the decline of the peak of the first wave and the increase of the second wave, where we
[Guest]: actually took it off. That's a very large gap compared to the gaps that most other countries
[Guest]: saw. So how did we think about it then? What some people did was to say we've reached herd immunity,
[Guest]: about 60% plus of our population is already infected. And that's why we can expect that
[Guest]: the disease will not bother us anymore. Unlike the US, unlike UK, France, etc, whether 10% or
[Guest]: 20%, they're nowhere near our numbers. We should have been a little careful about that because
[Guest]: they were saying the same thing in Brazil as well, that we've had, you know, in the region of Manaus,
[Guest]: we've already have 60%, 70% plus. And so therefore nothing is going to happen over there. We're out
[Guest]: of the woods, etc. What our work did over the last year, by going to about September, October,
[Guest]: November, when I was talking about this stuff, what I was doing was pointing out that according
[Guest]: to the models that we had, we were not near herd immunity. We could say that around 40 to 50% of
[Guest]: India in the cities was infected, but maybe 30 to 40% outside in the rural areas. So on an average,
[Guest]: maybe about 40% of India was infected with COVID-19. That's nowhere near the 60% plus
[Guest]: that was imagined to be the herd immunity threshold. So we said that, look, what's likely
[Guest]: to happen is that the cities may not show big outbreaks, but certainly the rest of the end is
[Guest]: just there, many millions of people, hundreds of millions of people yet to be infected, which is
[Guest]: why we should be careful. As more and more time wore on, and particularly for me, one turning
[Guest]: point was the fact that we didn't see a rise of cases during the puja time. So in November,
[Guest]: which is Diwali, puja in Bengal, the wedding season, etc. That's been a time and also the
[Guest]: onset of winter. So that's at a time when not just myself, pretty much every epidemiologist
[Guest]: around would have said this is a time when things are going to blow up. There are people to be
[Guest]: infected, people are going to come into contact, they're going to disregard every sort of physical
[Guest]: distancing, they're going to puja, you know what a puja in Calcutta is actually like,
[Guest]: and there's no way anybody can regulate that. Therefore, this is when we're going to see a
[Guest]: peak, and I like other people said this, but of course, I coached it differently. I said that,
[Guest]: look, we should be wary of, or we should be careful about this, etc. We just, there's just
[Guest]: a little blip in that data. It goes up a little bit and then comes down, but otherwise you can
[Guest]: sort of, if you just ignore that little blip, it's pretty much downhill all the way. So that,
[Guest]: I think, got me and other people thinking that maybe there is some truth to this. Maybe there
[Guest]: is, maybe the Indian population is protected in some way by exactly, as Siddhartha Mukherjee
[Guest]: pointed out, why in this number, and why was this such a large gap? A bunch of things changed
[Guest]: in, I think, February, and they changed in ways that perhaps we should have anticipated,
[Guest]: but I don't think one can be blamed for missing it, given what we knew at that time.
[Guest]: The suddenly, there appeared across multiple parts of the country, various variants of the
[Guest]: virus that were just more efficient at transmitting between people, and by just more, I mean by a
[Guest]: factor of two or three times more than the previous version. This also is likely that any
[Guest]: protection due to previous infection had begun to wear off by then, that the antibodies that
[Guest]: were generated if you're infected in July or August typically have a six to eight month
[Guest]: lifetime in your body. So by the time maybe you got to February or March, those antibodies were
[Guest]: at a low enough level that potentially you could be reinfected. Now here is a huge question,
[Guest]: because the immune system is not just antibodies reacting made by a prior infection. There are
[Guest]: many different paths to it. And, you know, there's a lovely quote, I think from Ed Young,
[Guest]: that says immunology is where intuition goes to die. And, you know, as from a scientific point
[Guest]: of view, that's true. It's incredibly complex, the nature of the human immune response to an
[Guest]: external invader that comes, that it encounters. So declining immunity from antibodies levels going
[Guest]: low, new variants much more efficient to transmitting between each other and in general
[Guest]: relaxations. I mean already, I think by the first of February, probably schools outside Bombay had
[Guest]: begun to open in more and more of the hinterland. In schools are always where you should watch,
[Guest]: because that's where infections move very rapidly between families. All you need is
[Guest]: one person in a family, child gets it, goes to school and then finally everybody in the class
[Guest]: takes it back home and that's when it spreads. And that's when, you know, it began to be noticed in
[Guest]: first in rural Maharashtra and then moving to the cities in Maharashtra. And then you saw this
[Guest]: incredibly sharp wave taking off of new cases there. So to come to your specific questions,
[Guest]: I don't think we could have predicted it. We know that viruses mutate all the time. We don't know,
[Guest]: we know most of the time that mutations don't do anything. So you can be as alert to it as
[Guest]: possible, but you know, you can keep writing them down every time they occur, but most of the time
[Guest]: they're actually irrelevant to this. Some specific mutations and we've only begun to understand which
[Guest]: they are over the last three to four months turn out to be specifically important because they
[Guest]: affect how the virus attaches to cells. It's these mutations that have happened in the Maharashtra,
[Guest]: the 1617 variant and that's where things have taken off. But to complicate matters,
[Guest]: there's a different variant that is responsible for cases in Punjab and Delhi. There's a different
[Guest]: variant that is responsible for cases in the south of India and Bangalore and Telangana and
[Guest]: there's a different variant that is responsible for the east of India, which seems to be a melting
[Guest]: pot of multiple variants, including potentially one from Bangladesh and so on. So the situation
[Guest]: is complicated. It could not have been anticipated. What could have been anticipated is government
[Guest]: response. The lessons of the first wave of COVID-19 were that our health systems are potentially
[Guest]: highly stressed. This is a time to build it up so that nothing happens in the future. Let's hope
[Guest]: nothing happens in the future, but it's also an excuse to do something better by public health
[Guest]: than we've done in the past, to put much more money into it than we've done in the past and
[Guest]: also guard against future, the future consequences of a rise in cases, which we're seeing now.
[Amit Varma]: So a question before that and aside, like you mentioned schools as, you know, places where
[Amit Varma]: obviously they'll spread because one kid gets it, all the kids get it and then, you know,
[Amit Varma]: half the cities got it like that. And I was listening to Anoop Malani on an episode of
[Amit Varma]: the Grand Tamasha with Milan Vaishnav, the podcast, which, you know, just came out recently
[Amit Varma]: and Anoop was talking about the dilemma of shutting schools down that if now the government decides
[Amit Varma]: that, hey, let's shut the schools down, because, you know, for these valid reasons, but the cost
[Amit Varma]: that it has on your human capital, where kids don't go to school for a year, and the downstream
[Amit Varma]: effects, the unseen effects, as it were, is also going to be devastating. And these things are
[Amit Varma]: absolutely incalculable. And the problem is that, you know, whatever decision a policymaker is to
[Amit Varma]: take now, you will only see the negative effects of that you won't see the positives in terms of
[Amit Varma]: the things that didn't happen. So it is just such an incredibly difficult choice. Now,
[Amit Varma]: my question is this, that, you know, it's easy to say that, oh, 10 years ago, we could have
[Amit Varma]: done something about this, taken it seriously, build this infrastructure, build that, build this,
[Amit Varma]: it's easy to say that after the first wave, we could have, you know, built 30 more oxygen plants
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah. Now, when I think of a politician's incentives, the politician's
[Amit Varma]: incentives, given that there is limited money that they have at their behest, and that all that
[Amit Varma]: spending has an opportunity cost will obviously be not to ward off the low probability high impact
[Amit Varma]: event, which may happen 10 years in the future, but cater to the election cycle and do whatever
[Amit Varma]: will win them votes in the next election, which for most people is probably five years, but
[Amit Varma]: actually for a party, it's almost like every day because there's always an election happening
[Amit Varma]: somewhere or the other. So the incentives of politicians would not be at all to ward off
[Amit Varma]: future pandemics, even now that we know what we know, you know, we will, I think, forever have
[Amit Varma]: the security theater of hand sanitization and all that, even though, you know, COVID-19 doesn't even
[Amit Varma]: spread by surfaces, as we know. But apart from that, it's very hard to foresee, like even from
[Amit Varma]: the data that we have from last year, and now, as various people, including you have pointed out that
[Amit Varma]: possibly a lot of the data we collected last year was faulty, which is why we couldn't prepare for
[Amit Varma]: this well enough. But the sort of oxygen shortages that were coming up, nobody mentioned anywhere in
[Amit Varma]: the public domain, say in February or before that we are going to have oxygen shortages.
[Amit Varma]: It's something that we now realize. And we now say that, oh, we should have planned for this
[Amit Varma]: earlier. And oh, why didn't the Modi government do this? Or why did the Kejriwal government spend
[Amit Varma]: 400 crores on advertising instead of building oxygen plants, all of which are in and of
[Amit Varma]: themselves, of course, valid. And the response of various governments in obfuscating and trying to
[Amit Varma]: change the narrative is shocking and unforgivable. And I hope the citizens of this country will
[Amit Varma]: remember this and not forgive them for that. But it's just that in hindsight, all this seems
[Amit Varma]: obvious. But in the moment, your incentives are completely against it. How does one deal with
[Amit Varma]: this? And as a scientist who is at different levels, interfacing with the government, talking
[Amit Varma]: to policymakers, what is the sense you get from there? Like, are they asking that, oh, this has
[Amit Varma]: happened? What should we do now to make this problem go away? Or are they thinking that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, tell me about, could there be a second wave next year? Could there be a third wave after that?
[Amit Varma]: What do we do about it now? What are those mindsets like?
[Guest]: Again, that's sort of difficult to answer. Go back to the first question that you asked about,
[Guest]: point that you made about schools. It is a very difficult policy choice.
[Guest]: And, you know, the consequences, the psychological consequences of having children out of the peer
[Guest]: group for a year, year and more. We don't, this is incalculable. We really don't know this yet.
[Guest]: And from what we will only see the consequences of the pandemic across multiple fronts only much
[Guest]: later. I think if you ask me, politicians should, given what they're seeing now, it would probably
[Guest]: be have been in the politician's best interest to have prepared three months ago for a possible
[Guest]: event like this. I think had you said that this would happen, or this might potentially have
[Guest]: happened, this is not the course that they might have chosen to take. So it's not clear to me with
[Guest]: the government who is giving it advice and on what fronts. This is a government that we know
[Guest]: is somewhat inward looking. There is a large group of IAS officers in the Prime Minister's,
[Guest]: in the PMO, who advise it. So Prime Minister Modi seems to be taking a lot of technocrats
[Guest]: around him and people who are, in a sense, reliant on him in many ways from whom he takes advice.
[Guest]: It's not clear that the government system currently is geared towards taking independent
[Guest]: advice from people outside except very informally and without even telling anybody that they
[Guest]: actually did it. So we don't know who's supplying information. We don't know the quality of the
[Guest]: information that is being supplied because none of this is in the public domain. We know that
[Guest]: this is largely Delhi centered, that all of this, that any committee that you can think of that is
[Guest]: a public health committee has seven people out of ten who are from Delhi. This makes no sense at all.
[Guest]: And so who is saying what, at what time, what the minutes were, what the recommendations were,
[Guest]: what are they based upon, we have no idea. So we really don't know what people were telling
[Guest]: the government. So it's no use telling people that, look, why didn't you say this, why didn't
[Guest]: you say that. People may have said it or not have said it, but there's no guarantee that anyone was
[Guest]: listening to them and we don't know what the internal committees that the government formed
[Guest]: at that time were telling them. I think the government had a difficult choice to make
[Guest]: because economic consequences of the lockdown, of essentially shutting down large parts of the
[Guest]: country in various ways for something like 10 months were very strong. And so this getting the
[Guest]: economy back on track, getting people back to work must have weighed very heavily on them.
[Guest]: And that takes money, that takes injection of physical stimulus at various points in the
[Guest]: economy. How do you do that? And you know, it was a hard choice to make and presumably at that point
[Guest]: they said that, look, it seems to be over, something has saved India.
[Guest]: They thought this was said is the Prime Minister has saved India, which didn't seem
[Guest]: quite to be true at that point, but something has saved India. We dodged a bullet.
[Guest]: We're a good example for the world. We're not, actually, we're not a good example for the world
[Guest]: in some ways, certainly. In other ways, certainly, yes. What I feel more is that a bunch of people
[Guest]: around that time, after the peak, when the peak had begun to subside, were saying, let's use this
[Guest]: experience to beef up public health in the country. We have seen what devastating consequences,
[Guest]: both on the health front, as well as on the economic front, are of not controlling a disease
[Guest]: that is liable to spread in the population. This is something that affects everybody,
[Guest]: rich or poor, wherever you happen to be, north or south, east or west. Let's just strengthen,
[Guest]: especially primary care, public health centres across the country, so that whatever happens in
[Guest]: the future, we will be prepared for it. You could argue that much of what we are seeing is because
[Guest]: we didn't do that little step. And that would have called for rethinking about public health,
[Guest]: which has traditionally been not a particularly high priority in the country, in a different way,
[Guest]: but informed by our experience of what a pandemic can actually do. Had we done that,
[Guest]: we would have been in a better situation now. That wasn't done. Forget about the delays,
[Guest]: and there are questions of why do the tenders go out in October, even though they should have
[Guest]: been issued several months earlier. All of these are massive screw-ups on a bureaucratic and
[Guest]: political scale. But even apart from all of that, I think just listening to what people were saying
[Guest]: about the possibilities of reconfiguring our public health system in the wake, in the aftermath of
[Guest]: the decrease in cases after the first wave, is something we should have done more seriously.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, I want to underscore a point that you've made a couple of times,
[Amit Varma]: which is a point of transparency. Like you speak about how you want your model to be
[Amit Varma]: transparent. And of course, how models become better is that they are transparent and there are
[Amit Varma]: feedback loops and so on, and they keep improving and they're open to improvement.
[Amit Varma]: And the problem with whatever is happening in the PMO and in the decision making of the country is
[Amit Varma]: that lack of transparency. They have processes. Now, how will those processes improve if there
[Amit Varma]: is no transparency and we don't even know what they are? Of course, you do not judge a process
[Amit Varma]: always by short term results. We know that. But the point is, you should be able to see the process
[Amit Varma]: for what it is. And that is simply not there. Even a person like me, I'll have processes,
[Amit Varma]: for example, for doing my podcast. And if I mess it up, I'll have to change those processes.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems that the government just needs to control the narrative and not give a damn about
[Amit Varma]: what the reality actually is. And their processes for controlling narrative are outstanding, though
[Amit Varma]: in many cases, you know, just as the dysfunctional state last year had only the blunt tool of the
[Amit Varma]: lockdown, their narrative machine seems to have the blunt tool of calling everybody who's against
[Amit Varma]: Modi anti-national and filing cases. And they couldn't blame Nehru. So they tried to blame
[Amit Varma]: Biden for this, which is just like so completely bizarre to me. My other question is this,
[Amit Varma]: what is tomorrow's oxygen? And what I mean by that is that after the second wave is gone,
[Amit Varma]: we are never going to be in a situation where people die because of lack of oxygen,
[Amit Varma]: because this particular proximate problem they would have solved. It is the same way as after
[Amit Varma]: there was that shoe bomber on a flight, they now check everybody's shoes, right? So in the future,
[Amit Varma]: oxygen, I'm fairly confident won't be a problem. But the point is, oxygen is just a symptom
[Amit Varma]: of bad planning and not thinking hard enough about public health and whatever, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what is the next shortage? What is tomorrow's oxygen? Where could we go? Like, what should
[Amit Varma]: we be thinking of now for the future, not necessarily just a third wave. And inshallah,
[Amit Varma]: if enough of us get vaccinated and all that, you know, which is a whole separate screw up,
[Amit Varma]: but inshallah, there won't be a third wave, but future pandemics because it will be future
[Amit Varma]: pandemics. So you know, what are the systemic things and see, I'm using the word system again,
[Amit Varma]: what are the sort of systemic lessons that we need to learn so that in future we don't get into this
[Amit Varma]: kind of situation where people are not dying because of a disease, but because of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: bad governance or scarcities that need not have arisen. So I can tell you about my experience
[Guest]: with being vaccinated. So I went to, I was in Chennai at that point and I was, since I have
[Guest]: some comorbidities together with being above 45, I got a letter from my doctor testing that and I
[Guest]: made an appointment on the website. Very, very smooth experience. You know, I was first checked,
[Guest]: my documentation was checked. My number was the same. Everybody wore a mask. I was asked to,
[Guest]: I was given the injection after everything was entered into this. I was asked to wait for half
[Guest]: an hour to 40 minutes. There was no one around me. Wonderful experience. This was in a public
[Guest]: health center. A friend of mine called and spoke to me a couple of days after that saying that,
[Guest]: look, you know, I went to another one. I had a fantastic experience. I had no idea.
[Guest]: I would normally have gone to a private hospital if I had to do anything, but the fact that this
[Guest]: was so beautifully organized, minimally crowded, careful, this is a care that I expect in a high
[Guest]: end private hospital, but I'm getting that in a government facility. So we can do it. I guess
[Guest]: that's the point that I'm making that, you know, we tend, from where we come from, we tend to think
[Guest]: of government facilities as being dirty, dingy, smelly, etc, etc. We don't want to go there,
[Guest]: it will be crowded, it will be awful. Let's pay extra money and go to place X or Y where we can
[Guest]: get the sort of experience that we think is a little more, is more pleasant and pleasurable
[Guest]: because anyway, face it, no one likes to go to hospital anyway. So you don't want to add mental
[Guest]: stress on top of that. Why can't we do this under normal circumstances? Why can't we have a public
[Guest]: health system that is the first choice? So I've lived for some years in Singapore where you have
[Guest]: a public health system and that's an automatic thing where you go and you go and you get
[Guest]: treated. Everybody gets treated exactly the same way. The facilities are clean, your insurance
[Guest]: pays for it, you're looked after well, whether you are, you know, the son of the prime minister,
[Guest]: whether you're a common person, you know, off the street, you're entitled to the same gamut of
[Guest]: facilities that anybody else is. I don't think you can actually, you'll just be playing whack-a-mole
[Guest]: if you try to anticipate which virus is going to come at which point, which way, when, etc.
[Guest]: Let's just concentrate on the basics and let's just make sure that the basics of a strong public
[Guest]: health system across the country, let's not sort of look at cities where all of us come from. Let's
[Guest]: just look at remote areas and until a place, a small village in Jharkhand has the same level of
[Guest]: access as someone in Borevali or someone in Basantrihat, that I think would be a real index
[Guest]: of where we move as a society, as a sort of larger question of equity in our society.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you on it being an ideal end goal, almost a utopian end goal. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: the big question is how do we get here from there because we know what the incentives are,
[Amit Varma]: we know that our state is fundamentally a dysfunctional state, the few things that we
[Amit Varma]: ought to do well, like rule of law, public health, we don't do it all, we're completely absent,
[Amit Varma]: which has become more stark in this current crisis, whereas we interfere in so many things
[Amit Varma]: where we should not actually be present. So, I mean, but that is a whole question of political
[Amit Varma]: economy and possibly beyond the scope of this. Let's kind of talk about India for a moment,
[Amit Varma]: like Siddhartha Mukherjee's piece, of course, speculated on some of the possible plausible reasons why
[Amit Varma]: India escaped last year, you know, whether it's the BFG vaccines, whether it is that we have a
[Amit Varma]: relatively younger population and the virus targets older people. You also have made a great point
[Amit Varma]: about the survivorship bias, which I'll quickly spell out for my listeners, you mentioned it
[Amit Varma]: earlier. But the point that Gautam is effectively making there is that because of the state of our
[Amit Varma]: public health system and all of that, our older people tend to, you know, succumb to diseases,
[Amit Varma]: other diseases quicker than people in the West do. The older people who are left are actually the
[Amit Varma]: stronger, hardier sort of people who therefore also have a better capacity of fighting the COVID
[Amit Varma]: virus when it comes, which is, you know, a fascinating and very logical theory. And there
[Amit Varma]: was also this bizarre theory that, you know, the heat will kill the virus. Now, none of that kind
[Amit Varma]: of seems to apply. So, you know, is it just that they applied to the previous, to the original
[Amit Varma]: SARS-CoV-2, but this variant just does all these other things differently? Or is it that our
[Amit Varma]: understanding was flawed, we somehow got lucky? Or is it that it did actually hit us really hard,
[Amit Varma]: but the numbers don't show it, that the data isn't accurate?
[Guest]: My feeling is that it did actually hit us hard. And this was a nice, I was on a panel yesterday
[Guest]: where I think Ramanan Laxminarayan pointed out that to get to about a million deaths in India,
[Guest]: if you sort of distributed it out over all the districts of India, it's unclear that you would
[Guest]: pick up that little fluctuation, because at the district level, given what the numbers are,
[Guest]: an extra three to five deaths per district, etc. added up across the whole year, you would not
[Guest]: have attracted that much attention. What you really need is understand what the background
[Guest]: is in a good year of all of the deaths, and then check to see in the COVID year how that changed.
[Guest]: But for that, you must have better records. Right now, at least my thinking is that it's
[Guest]: a combination of the young population, a combination of the fact that we don't
[Guest]: record deaths well outside, plus multiple pressures on people, families not telling
[Guest]: society, doctors, clinical people that this is potentially a COVID patient,
[Guest]: because there's a stigma attached to COVID in the country. So people may not want to do that.
[Guest]: Deaths being unrecorded across much of the country is probably a large factor in this.
[Guest]: And I think it's a combination, if you added all of these up, then we don't do it so badly,
[Guest]: I think, I mean, our numbers are floating up towards Brazil's numbers, or towards the UK
[Guest]: numbers, once you adjust for all that. The largest single part of this is just age.
[Guest]: And that's certainly true. Whether how much of it extra beyond that is some biological,
[Guest]: you know, your microbiome, prior infection, coronavirus, hygiene hypothesis, etc, etc,
[Guest]: or BCG, or whatever it is, that remains a question mark. But I think you get to about 80% plus,
[Guest]: just by accounting for age, and just by accounting for the undercounting of deaths.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. And tell me about the second wave now, like how worried should we be?
[Amit Varma]: What exactly is going on? I think many people are just beveled, like on Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: I get this constant reaction from people, which I kind of share that we are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's this new term doom scrolling, that I'll often just find myself, it's just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you reach a stage of numbness. Like, you know, I wake up every morning and Gautam,
[Amit Varma]: honestly, for the first half an hour, I'm just writing condolences on Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: or, you know, take care and all of that, or get well soon and whatever. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: I get your point that, you know, the first wave may not have hit people in our elite circles.
[Amit Varma]: So hard that, you know, seroprevalence studies showed that they were much harder in the slums
[Amit Varma]: and Tharvi, for example, and all of that. And therefore, PLU people like us, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: kind of escaped it. And now we are, you know, really, it's come home, so to say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how do we make sense of this? Like, this is very virulent, very infectious.
[Amit Varma]: What is a natural curve we should expect? Obviously, I think that things have become
[Amit Varma]: much worse because of bad governance and all the scarcities, like of oxygen, like people
[Amit Varma]: just dying because there's no oxygen is like, would have been so unthinkable and dystopian
[Amit Varma]: a year ago. You know, where are we going with this? Where is the peak going to come? Like,
[Amit Varma]: I know different models have shown, you know, middle of May, end of May, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: What is the best case scenario and the worst case scenario for this?
[Guest]: I can tell you one major source of uncertainty. And that is to what extent are reinfections
[Guest]: important? If reinfections are very important, then having caught it once makes no difference
[Guest]: to getting, catching it again here. And that's very crucial because that expands the susceptible
[Guest]: population to what it was in January of last year. It basically be back to square one.
[Guest]: If, on the other hand, it's somewhat protective, every bit of protection that you get from a prior
[Guest]: infection or a vaccination helps. Okay, so we don't know that at all yet. The best models now,
[Guest]: the models, if you sort of average, as I said, in an ensemble sense or multiple model projections,
[Guest]: that would suggest by about the middle of May is when you can expect to see a downturn.
[Guest]: There are many reasons why you will not see it then. One reason is just testing. Already testing
[Guest]: across the country has pretty much gone down to levels that are just not sufficient to cope with
[Guest]: this increase in cases. In Delhi, it can take you something like two to three days or four days for
[Guest]: someone to come to your house to test you. It can take another three days for you to get the test
[Guest]: result. So this gap between falling sick and getting tested is becoming larger and larger and
[Guest]: larger. The rate at which tests are going is quite slow compared to the rate at which cases are
[Guest]: growing. Already Delhi test positivity is 35 percent plus. For a country as a whole, it's 20
[Guest]: percent plus. So look at the number of cases that you're missing of people who ought to be tested
[Guest]: and people who've decided that, look, I'm not going to get tested at all because I suspect that
[Guest]: I have it. I'm just going to lock myself up in my room and not bother to test. So you'll never get
[Guest]: an idea of what the real number is, especially now, precisely because of these reasons. And
[Guest]: because you're not testing enough, you will not see the eight lakhs and the ten lakhs that people
[Guest]: have been predicting. These are the doomsday predictions that people have been making.
[Guest]: Because you will see your testing will saturate and you will see something that appears to be
[Guest]: coming down. God knows what's happening inside the background. So my best guess, based on the
[Guest]: models that we have and others, is that you will see a genuine downturn around the middle of May.
[Guest]: How will we survive until then? That is completely open to, I mean, it's very hard to imagine that's
[Guest]: another, at least another two weeks plus from here. It may be shifted a little forward. It
[Guest]: may be shifted a little back. Unlikely that it will go on deep into June is my feeling. It really,
[Guest]: I would really put some money on the middle of May from what we have. We're recording on April 28th,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, for my listeners. We're recording on April 28th, yeah. So that's about two weeks.
[Amit Varma]: No, and what you're saying about the gap in testing is also crazy because one way in which
[Amit Varma]: people are dying is that hospitals are at times refusing to admit people to their COVID ICU if
[Amit Varma]: they haven't tested COVID positive and they are COVID positive, but the tests aren't coming in
[Amit Varma]: time. So it's really death by bureaucracy as it were. Yes, exactly. Which is just a horrendous
[Amit Varma]: state of affairs. You know, in my show notes, I'll direct people to the other, like the panel
[Amit Varma]: discussion you mentioned, which I also saw and which was illuminating a bunch of different
[Amit Varma]: experts apart from you also giving great insights there and to all the things you've written and so
[Amit Varma]: on. I'll ask you now, you know, as we leave this episode to also for a moment move away from COVID
[Amit Varma]: and but just generally talk about, you know, for those who in the first half of this episode might
[Amit Varma]: have been turned on to the joy and wonder of science. In a certain sense, we live in magical
[Amit Varma]: times and most magical times because so much of knowledge is just opening up to us in various
[Amit Varma]: different fields. You know, one of the memes for my show kind of is that people, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people have actually posted pictures of seen and unseen bookshelves of books bought from
[Amit Varma]: recommendations on the show. So I'm going to ask you to recommend, you know, your favorite books,
[Amit Varma]: which convey some of this joy in the different areas that you're passionate about, whether it's
[Amit Varma]: physics or biology or modeling or maths or even music that, you know, you feel enthusiastic about
[Guest]: and would love to share with the world. A book called Spillover by David Quammen, an American
[Guest]: writer on nature and diseases is a particularly important book because in a sense, it was very
[Guest]: prescient. It foresaw the fact that in the next few years, we would have a what is called a
[Guest]: spillover event from an animal virus from possibly from bats coming over to human beings and sort of
[Guest]: examining what the long-term consequences of that were. Contagion by Adam Kucharski is another very
[Guest]: good book and that again is the idea of how epidemics spread in non-disease contexts as well.
[Guest]: How do pandemics of financial collapse happen and how do social rumors spread,
[Guest]: how do gangs form and what is, so that certainly expands the way in which you think about how
[Guest]: you, how something in very small initially is amplified into something that can transform
[Guest]: society. The Egyptian spring, the Africans at the spring in terms of the movements that try to
[Guest]: overthrow repressive governments was another example of a collective effect starting from
[Guest]: small groups of people beginning to organize. That I think is really the important idea behind a lot
[Guest]: of what I think about how and it's also very physics idea. How does collective behavior come
[Guest]: from what are initially somewhat random behaviors of individuals that suddenly seem to build up into
[Guest]: some sort of coherent whole. That's as true for examples in physics as it is for examples in
[Amit Varma]: epidemiology. Fascinating and these are epidemiology and disease, other stuff, music. What's your
[Amit Varma]: favorite fiction? Are there any books you go back to from your younger days or your childhood and
[Guest]: like to reread? To tell you the truth, I'm kind of blanking on it right now because I've not been
[Guest]: because I've not been reading anything but scientific papers for the past several months.
[Amit Varma]: So, I will think about this and supply an appropriate note for you. So, I'll have a
[Guest]: separate section in my show notes for your recommendation. So, you can send as many books
[Amit Varma]: as you want to do that. Gautam, you know, thank you so much for your time and your insights. I
[Amit Varma]: know especially in these busy times where you're playing such an important role for you to take
[Amit Varma]: out this time for me is quite something. So, I'm really grateful for that. Thank you so much.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. It has been wonderful talking to you and you ask such great questions and I
[Amit Varma]: really enjoyed being on the show.
[Amit Varma]: So, if so, would you like to support the production of the show, you can go over to
[Amit Varma]: seen unseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and
[Amit Varma]: kicking. Thank you.